






ALAN WATTS:... Look then, we’re going to discuss where it’s 
going... the whole problem of whether to drop out or take over. 
TIMOTHY LEARY: Or anything in between? 

WATTS: Or anything in between, sure. 

LEARY: Cop out... drop in... 

GARY SNYDER: I see it as the problem about whether or not to 
throw'all your energies to the subculture or try to maintain some 
communication network within the main culture. 

WATTS: Yes. All right;. Now look... I would like to make a pre¬ 


liminary announcement so that it has a certain coherence. 

This is Alan Watts speaking, and I’m this evening, on my ferry 
boat, the host to a fascinating party sponsored by the San Francisco 
Oracle, which is our new underground paper, far-outer than any 
far-out that has yet been seen. And we have here, members of the 
staff of the Oracle. We have Allen Ginsberg, poet, and rabbinic 
saddhu. We have Timothy Leary, about whom nothing needs to be 
said, (laughs) And Gary Snyder, also poet, Zen monk, and old 
friend of many years. 









i\'| 


ALLEN GINSBERG: 

This swami wants you to 
introduce him in Berkeley. 

He's going to have a Kirtan to 
f sanctify the peace movement. So 
what I said is, he ought to invite Jer- 
1 ry Rubin and Mario Savio, and his co- 
| horts. And he said: "Great, great,great! " 

So I said, "Why don't you invite-the Hell's 
| Angels, too?" He said: "Great, great, great! 

I When are we gonna, get hold of them? " 

So I think that's one next feature... 

I WATTS: You know, what is being said here, 

I To sanctify the peace movement is to take the violence 
1 out of it. 

1 GINSBERG: Well, to point attention to its root nature, 

1 which is desire for peace, which is equivalent to the 
1 goals of all the wisdom schools and all the Saddhanas. 

A PACIFIST ON THE RAMPAGE 
i WATTS: Yes, but it isn't so until sanctified. That 
is to say, I have found in practice that nothing is 
i more violent than peace movements. You know, 
l when you get a pacifist on the rampage, nobody can 
1 be more emotionally bound and intolerant and full 
I of hatred. 

And I think this is the thing that many of us un- 
I derstand in common, that we are trying to take 
I moral violence out of all those efforts that are being 
1 made to bring human beings into a harmonious rela- 
| tionship. 

1 GINSBERG: Now, how much of that did the peace move- 
I ment people in Berkeley realize? 

WATTS: I don't think they realize it at all. I think 
I they're still working on the basis of moral violence, 
just as Gandhi was. 

GINSBERG: Yeah... I went last night and turned on 
with Mario Savio. Two nights ago... After I finished 
and I was talking with him, and he doesn't turn on very 
much... This was maybe about the third or fourth time. 

He was describing his efforts in terms of the motive 
power for large mass movements. He felt one of the 
things that move large crowds was righteousness, moral 
outrage, and ANGER... Righteous anger. 

MENOPAUSAL MINDS 
LEARY: Well, let's stop right here. The implication 
of that statement is: we want a mass movement. Mass 
[ movements make no sense to me, and I want no part of 
mass movements. I think this is the error that the left- 
l ist activists are making. I see them as. young men with 
1 menopausal minds. 

‘i They are repeating the same dreary quarrels and 
l conflicts for power of the thirties and the forties, of 
I-the trade union movement, of Trotskyism and so forth. 

I.think they should be sanctified, drop out, find 
their own center, turn on, and above all avoid 
mass movements, mass leadership, mass follow¬ 
ers. I see that there is a great difference — I 
say completely incompatible difference — between 
k the leftist activist movement and the psychedelic 
religious movement. 

In the first place, the psychedelic movement, 

I I think, is much more numerous. But it doesn’t 
' express itself as noisily. I think there are dif¬ 
ferent goals. I think that the activists want po¬ 
wer. They talk about student power. This shocks 
le, and alienates my spiritual sensitivities. 


Of, course, 
there is a great 
deal of difference in 
method. The psychedelic 
ovement, the spiritual seeker 
movement, or whatever you want 

to call it, expresses itself_as the 

Haight-Ashbury group had done.. .with 
flowers and chants and pictures and beads 
and acts of beauty and harmony... sweeping 
the streets. That sort of thing. 

WATTS: And giving away free food. 

LEARY: Yes... I think this point must be made 
straight away, but because we are both looked upon 
with disfavor by the Establishment, this tendency to 
group the two together. . -. I think that such confusion 
can only lead to disillusion and hard feelings on some¬ 
one's part. So, I'd like to lay this down as a premise 
right at the beginning. 

GINSBERG: Well, of course, that's the same premise] 
they lay down, that there is an irreconcilable split. 
Only, their stereotype of the psychedelic movement 
is that it’s just sort of like the opposite... I think 
you're presenting a stereotype of them. 

SNYDER: I think that you have to look at this his¬ 
torically, and there's no doubt that the historical 
roots of the revolutionary movements and the his- I 
torical roots of this spiritual movement are iden- f 
tical. This is something that has been going o 
since the Neolithic as a strain in human history, and J 
one which has been consistently, on one level or ano 
ther, opposed to the collectivism.of civilization to¬ 
ward the rigidities of the city states and city tem¬ 
ples. Christian utopianism is behind Marxism. 

LEARY: They’re outs and they want in. 

UTOPIAN, RELIGIOUS DRIVE 
SNYDER: .. .but historically it arrives from a 
utopian and essentially religious drive. The early rev¬ 
olutionary political movements in Europe have this utop¬ 
ian strain in them. 

Then Marxism finally becomes a separate, non-religious 
movement, but only very late. That utopian strain runs 
right through it all along. So that we do share this... 
GINSBERG: What are the early utopian texts ? What are 
the early mystical utopian political texts ? 

SNYDER: Political? 

GINSBERG: Yeah. Are you running your mind back 
through Bakunin or something ?■ 

SNYDER: I’m running it back to earlier people. To Four- I 
ier, and stuff... 

WATTS: Well, it goes back to the seventeenth century 
and the movements in Flemish and German mysticism, 
which started up the whole idea of democracy in Eng¬ 
land in the seventeenth century. You have the Ana- , 
baptists, the Levellers, the Brothers of the Free 
Spirit... 

SNYDER: The Diggers! 

SECULAR MYSTICISM 

WATTS:, THE DIGGERS, and all those people, 
and then eventually the Quakers. This was the 
source. It was, in a way, a secularization of 
mysticism. 

In other words, the mystical doctrine that all 
men are equal in the sight of God, for the simple 
reason, that they ARE God. They're all God's 
incarnations. J 

CONT.onP.t ' 


Archival CoHecHon 





"Bom bom 
mahadev!" the 
mantra yogis' cry as 
they raise the ganja pipe to 
inhale means "boom boom great 
god, " according to Allen Ginsberg, who 
tells of having smoked it with Shaivite worshippers, de¬ 
votees and yogis at Nimtallah ghat in Calcutta, where Speaking for many who 
it is considered the beginning of the yogic path of are friends and for myself, 


by Harry Monroe 


ly and intelli¬ 
gently explored by 
leading authorities, and 
by such I do not mean the police 
or federal agents. 

Put together by a savant and not a pro- 
pagandizer, this book contains sufficient evidence to 
refute the specious arguments that fall under the 
heading: killer drug nonsense and propaganda.. 


Saddhana and, of course, is legal. I have not the slightest reser- Mr. Solomon has collated a massive volume 

Ganja is a very superior grade of Indian hemp vation in saying that this much ma- of absolutely convincing evidence to support 
much stronger than the best marijuana availa- figned plant has powers that elevate the statement that marijuana is good for 

ble in the United States. Allen was in India the human condition from a purely mater- you, good for your health, good for your 
for a long while, and his First Manifesto j a | p i ane to the spiritual. mind, and good for your world, 

to End the Bringdown is perhaps the best If t hi s is opinion, it is one shared with four hun- K seems an understatement to say 
source of reasons why marijuana smo- dred m illion others in the world. ' it is good for your soul when one 

king is one of the most beneficial has witnessed in self and others 

things a person can do, and not a AN EXPLORATION a development of soul and spir- 

little holy. I came across Allen'si FirstManifesto in David Solomon's defin- itual growth attributable to 

A goodly number of us know a ti ve study of the subject: TflE MARIJUANA PAPERS, Bobbs-Merrill, marijuana. This is an 

this by the most directly con- 450 pages, $10. 00. Really three books under one cover with appendix. It opinion shared with an . 
vincing evidence possible. is well written, and I cannot think of any, are a of the subject that is not thorough- (cont. on p .18 y 








THE ADVENT OF THE 
WORLD-TEACHER 

The significance of one of the 
great revelations of our time has 
been largely overlooked except by oc¬ 
cultists. It has been twelve years 
since the newspaper announcement that 
on the evening of December 2, 1954, Pope 
Pius XII announced that he had experienced 
a divine vision with the words, "This morn¬ 
ing I saw the Lord. " 

This event marked the descent of the Chris¬ 
tos, the archetypal Christ to the astral plane, 
preparatory to manifesting in the world of men. 
During the following year, mystics working 
with the Spiritual Hierarchy of the planet 
quietly exchanged information about contacts 
similar to that reported by the Pope, con¬ 
tacts which served to raise the vibrations 
of the initiates concerned and to stimulate 
their capacity to meditate on behalf of the 
enlightenment of the planet, as mediators 
between humanity and Hierarchy. 

This descent also marked an impor¬ 
tant step in preparation for manifesta¬ 
tion in the world of men. A great Be ¬ 
ing such as this Bodhisattva can mani¬ 
fest in multiple forms through a sort 
of grace or spiritual seed, or through 
forming a temporary union or over - 
shadowing of physical bodies already 
prepared for His use. Many have 
wondered whether the late President 
Kennedy may not have been thus di¬ 
vinely overshadowed during his last 
years, as his ideals served to in 


(Christ) dramatized the essen¬ 
tial constituents,. ..resumes in 
its upward progress the spiritual 
life-history of the race. 

Jacob Boehme pointed out that the 
secret of the alchemists, the finding of 
the formula for the Philosopher's Stone 
and the bringing to birth of the indwelling 
divinity were one and the same process, and 
could be brought to manifestation. Whether we 
call this manifestation and Incarnation of Christ, 
Vishnu, Ishvara or Krishna, it is the indwelling 
Divinity made manifest in flesh. 

If the rays of manifesting energy are of sev¬ 
eral types we have the mystic with a special 
talent for the mystic art. But, as the Tibetan 
Master of the Wisdom Djwhal Khul points out, . 
Alice A. Bailey's book, Treatise on Cos - 


ing a succession of initiates*or using a 
series of physical bodies prepared for 

his use, great Hierarchial Beings can _ 

dwell in their Sambhogakaya bodies of sub- mic Fire , when the rays of divine energy en- 
tle matter and transfer from one physical souling the form are of a specific and con- 

body to another for active work. Mystics centrated form, we have a Messiah or an 

such as St. Teresa of Avila and Jacob Boehme avatar. 

experienced the Christos as an intimate spirit- The coming forth of such avatars is done 
ual experience and later as a component of their 
very selves. 

It is only our own spiritual ignorance and lack 
entire enlightenment that does not recognize the 
latent spiritual process that brings forth the im¬ 
manent Divinity within every man and woman. In 
Evelyn Underhill’s book, Mysticism, she says, "The 
Incarnation, which is for traditional Christianity syn¬ 
onymous with the historical birth ancf earthly life of 
Christ, is for mystics of a certain type, not only this 
but also a perpetual Cosmic and personal process. 

"It is an everlasting bringing forth, in the universe, and as men are blinded by glamours of 

_______ also in the individual ascending soul, of the divine and per- the past. -- 

spire the entire world. By inspir- f ect Life, the pure character of God... as the soul, of which (cont. on p .35 y 


n accordance with astrological cycles of 
divine energy, and therefore the present 
coming forth of the Messiah and the ex- 
temalization of the Spiritual Hierarchy 
that will aid Him in His work has been 
long awaited throughout the world. 
Some wait for Krishna, some for the 
Lord Maitreya, some for the second 
coming of the Christ. But when He 
comes he will have none of these 
names. He may go unrecognized, 










When that doctrine is secularized, it communicating community among the 
becomes a parody.. .that all men are hippies will lead to some concentration 
equally inferior. And therefore may be camp situation, or lead... as it has been 
evil-treated by the bureaucrats and the in Los Angeles recently.. .to a disper- 
police, with no manners. sal of what the beginning of the commun- 

The whole tendency of this equaliza- ity began, 
tion of man in the nineteenth century is LEARY: These are the old, menopausal 
a result, in a way, of the work of Freud, minds. There was a psychiatrist named 
But the absolute recipe for writing a Adler in San Francisco whose interpre¬ 
best seller biography was to take some tation of the group Be-In was that this 
person who was renowned for his virtue is the basis for a new fascism.. .when 
and probity, and to show, after all, that a leader comes along. And I sense in 
everything was scurrilous and low down the activist movement the cry for a. lea- 
You see? This became the parody. der.. .the cry for organization... 

Be cause the point that I am making — GINSBERG: But they're just as intelli- 
this may seem to be a little.bit of a. di- gent as you are on this fact. They know 
version, but the actual point is this: about what happened in Russia. That's 

Whenever the insights one derives the reason they haven't got a big, active 
from mystical vision become politically organization. 

active, they always create their own It's because they, too, are stumped 

opposite. They create a parody. by: How do you have a community, and 

Wouldn't you agree with that, Tim? a community movement, and coopera- 
I mean, this is the point I think you're tion within the community to make life 
saying: that when we try to force a yis- more pleasing for everybody — includ- 
ion upon the world, and say that every- ing the end of the Vietnam war? How 
body ought to have this, and it's GOOD do you have such a situation organized, 
for you, then a parody of it is set up. or disorganized, just so long as it's ef- 
As it was historically when this vision fective — without a fascist leadership? 
was forced upon the West, that all men Becausethey don't want to be that either, 
are equal in the sight of God ans so on . See, they are conscious of the fact 
and so forth. . . it became bureaucratic that they don't want to be messiahs — 
democracy, which is that all people are political messiahs. At least, Savio in 
equally inferior. particular. Yesterday, he was weeping. 

SNYDER: Well, my answer to what Tim Saying he wanted to go out and live in 
was saying there is that, it seems to me nature, 
at least, in left-wing politics there are LEARY: Beautiful, 
certain elements, and there are always GINSBERG: So, I mean he's like basic- 
going to be certain people who are moti- ally where we are: stoned. 

ted 6 by by ^ S3me th ™ g ^ Pm motlVa ' GENIUS OF NON-LEADERSHIP 

And I don’t want to reject the history, WATTS: Well, I think that thus far, the 
or the sacrifices of the people in that genius of this kind of underground that 
movement. .. if they can be brought a- we’re talking about is that it has no 
round to what I would consider a more leadership, 
profound vision of themselves, and a LEARY: Exactly! 
more profound vision of themselves and WATTS: That everybody recognizes 
society... everybody else. 

LEARY: I think we should get them to GINSBERG: Right, except that that's 


(CONT.fi-t 


drop out, turn on, and tune i 


not really entirely so. 


GINSBERG: Yeah, but they don't know WATTS: Isn't it so? But it is so to a 


great extent n 


LEARY: I know it. No politician, left GINSBERG: There's an organized lead- ture is 


r right, young or old, knows what \ 
mean by that. 

GINSBERG: Don't be so angry! 
LEARY: I'm not angry... 

GINSBERG: Yes, you are. Now, wait 


cooperate, and those community groups 
sparked by active people who don't 


a minute... Everybody in Berkeley, all necessarily parade their names in pub- 
week long,, has been bugging me... and lie, but who are capable people.. .who 


Alpert... about what you mean by drop are capable of ordering sound trucks 
out, tune in, and turn on. Finally, one and distributing thousands of cubes of 
young kid said, "Drop out, turn on, and LSD and getting signs posted. .. 
tune in. " Meaning: get with an activity- WATTS: Oh yes, tTiat’s perfectly true, 
a manifest worldly activity—that's har- There are people who can organize 
monious with whatever vision he l>as. things. But they don , t assume t he figure- 
Everybody in Berkeley is all bugged head role< 


ership, say, at such a thing as a Be-In. Whereas, if you take the Chinese view of theworld. 
There is organization; there is commun- which is organic. .They would say, for example, that 
ity. There are community groups which the human body is an organization in which there is 
no boss. It is a situation of order resulting from 
mutual interrelationship of all the parts. 

And what we need to realize is that there can be, 
shall we say, a movement.. .a stirring among peo¬ 
ple. . .which can be ORGANICALLY designed instead 
of POLITICALLY designed. It has no boss. Yet all 
parts recognize each other in the same way as the 
cells of the body all cooperate together. 

SNYDER: Yes, it's a new social structure. It's a 
new social structure which follows certain kinds of 
historically known tribal models. 


because they think, one: drop-out thing LEARY: I would prefer to call them foci LEARY: Exactly, yeah! My historical reading of 

really doesn't mean anything, that what Q f energy. There's no question. Yo*u-the situation is that these great, monolithic empires 

you're gonna cultivate is a lot of freak- start the poetry, chanting thing. .. that developed in history: Rome, Turkey and so 

out hippies goofing around and throwing WATTS- Yes ' ''' forth_always break down when enough people (and 

bottles through windows when they flip LEARY- And I come along with a cele- it;,s alwa Y s the young, the creative, and the minority 

bration.' Like Allen and Gary at the Be- S rou P s ) dro P ° ut and S° back to a tribal form. 
j n I agree with what I've heard you say in the past, 

Gary, that the basic unit is tribal, What I envision 
NATURE AND BOSSISM is thousands of small groups throughout the United 

States and Western Europe, and eventually theworld, 

, NO ,iKe It'S no uiuerem. WATTS: And there is nobody in charge as dropping out. What happened when Rome fell? 

.to towsp^r vision, anyway, I St'SS Weslem w “id tos' Jer “ ,lem ' eU? “““ e ' 0 “ PS 

mean, thev’ve got the newspaper vision. , , , „ , . , went on togetner... 

Then secondlv thev're afraid that labored for many, many centuries under GINSBERG: Precisely what do you mean by drop out, 
there’ll’be some sort of fascist putsch. 3 monarchical conception of the universe then ... agalll) for the millionth time ? 

T ., ... ■ 1 lntelvthat evervone's where God is the boss, and political sys- SNYDER: Drop out throws me a little bit, Tim. Be- 

■>. [ * __terns and all kinds of law have been based cause it»s assumed that we're dropping out.The next_ 


out on LSD. That's their stereotype 
vision. Obviously stereotyped. 
LEARY: Sounds like bullshitting... 

THE NEWSPAPER VISION 
GINSBERG: No, like it’s no different 


gonna be arrested. So that the lack of 




e doing where we're in 


6 




Gary, that daring the time you were 
living this way, I visited you on occa¬ 
sion, and you had a little hut way up 
on the hillside of Homestead Valley in 
Mill Valley and I want to say, for the 
record, that this was one of the most 
beautiful pads I ever saw. It was sweet 
and clean, and it had a very, very 
good smell to the whole thing. You 
were living what I consider to be a 
very noble life. 

Now, then, the question that next 
arises, if this is the way of being a 
successful drop-out, which I think is 
true... Can you have a wife and child 
under such circumstances ? 

SNYDER: Yeah, I think you can, sure. 
WATTS: What about when the, state 
forces you to send the child to school? 
SNYDER: You send it to school. 
LEARY: Oh no, c'mon, I don't see 
this as drop-out at all. 

SNYDER: I want to finish what I was 
going to say. That's they way it was 
ten years ago. 

Today, there is a huge community. 
When any kid drops out today, he's 
got a subculture to go fall into. He's 
got a place to go where there'll be 
friends, and people that will put him 
up and people that will feed him — at 
least for a while — and keep feeding 
him indefinitely, if he moves around 
from pad to pad. 

LEARY: That's just stage one. The 
value of the Lower East Side, or of 
the district in Seattle or the Haight- 
Ashbury, is that it provides a first 
launching pad. 

Everyone that's caught inside a te¬ 
levision set of props, and made of 
actors . . . The first thing that you have 
to do is completely detach yourself 
from anything inside the plastic, robot 
Establishment. 

A WAY STATION: A LAUNCHING PAD 

The next step — for many people— 
could well be a place like Haight - 
Ashbury. There they will find spiri¬ 
tual teachers, there they will find 
friends, lovers, wives... 

But that must be seen clearly as a 
way station. I don't think the Haight - 
Ashbury district — any city, for that 
matter — is a place where the new 
tribal... 

SNYDER: I agree with you. Not in 
the city. 

LEARY: ... is going to live. So, I 
mean DROP OUT! I don't want to be 
misinterpreted. I'm dropping out... 
step by step. 

Millbrook, by the way, is a. tribal 
community. We're getting closer and 
closer to the landing... We're working 
out our way of import and export with 
the planet. We consider ourselves a 
tribe of mutants. Just like all the little 
tribes of Indians were. We happen to 
have our little area there, and we have 
to come to terms with the white men 
around us. 

WHAT ARE YOU BUILDING? 

SNYDER: Now look... Your drop-out 
line is fine for all those other people 
out there, you know, that's what you've 
got to say to them. But, I want to hear 
what you're building. What are you ma¬ 
king? 

LEARY: What are we building? 
SNYDER: Yeah, what are you building? 


WATTS: Gary, I think that you have 
something to say here. Because you, to 
me, are one of the most fantastically 
capable drop-out people I have ever met 
I think, at this point, you should say a 
word or two about your own experience 
of how to live on nothing. How to get by 
in life economically. 

This is the nitty-gritty. This is where 
it really comes down to in many people's 
minds. Where's the bread going to come 
from if everybody drops out? Now, you 
know expertly where it's gonna come 
from — living a life of integrity and not 
being involved in a. commute-necktie- 
strangle scene. 

SNYDER: Well, this isn't news to any¬ 
body, but ten or fifteen years ago when 
we dropped out, there wasn't a commu¬ 
nity. There wasn't anybody who was go¬ 
ing to take care of you at all. You were 
really completely on your own. 

What it meant was, cutting down on 
desires and cutting down on your 
to an absolute minimum; and it 
Iso meant, don't be a bit fussy about 
how you work or what you do for a 

That meant doing any kind of work. 
Strawberry picking, carpenter, laborer, 
longshore. . . Well, longshore is hard to 
get into. It paid very well. Shipping 
out. . . that also pays very well. 


But at least in my time , it meant be¬ 
ing willing to do any goddam kind of 
labor that came your way, and not being 
fussy about it. 

And it meant cultivating the virtue of 
patience — the patience of sticking with 
a shitty job long enough to win the bread 
that you needed to have some more lei¬ 
sure, which meant more freedom to do 
more things that you wanted to do. And 
mastering all kinds of techniques of 
living really cheap... 

Like getting free rice off the docks, 
because the loading trucks sometimes 
fork the rice sacks, and spill little piles 
of rice on the docks which are usually 
thrown away. 

But I had it worked out with some of 
the guards down on the docks that they 
would gather 15 or 25 pounds of rice for 
me, and also tea... I'd pick it up once 
a week off the docks, and then I'd take 
it around and give it to friends. This 
was rice that was going to be thrown 
away, otherwise. Techniques like that. 
WATTS: Second day vegetables from 
the supermarket... 

SNYDER: Yeah, we used to go around 
at one or two in the morning, around 
the Safeways and Piggly Wigglies in 
Berkeley, with a shopping bag, and hit 
the garbage cans out in back. We'd get 
Chinese cabbage, lots of broccoli and 
artichokes that were thrown out because 
they didn't look sellable anymore. 

So, I never bought any vegetables for 
the three years I was a graduate stu¬ 
dent at Berkeley. When I ate meat, it 
was usually horse meat from the pet 
store, because they don't have a law 
that permits them to sell horsemeat 
for human consumption in California 
like they do in Oregon. 

GINSBERG: You make a delicious . 
horse meat sukiyaki. (laughter) 

A SWEET, CLEAN PAD 
WATTS: Well, I want to add to this, 


something else? We're in a new society. We're in 
the seeds of a new society. 

GINSBERG: For instance, you haven't dropped out, 
Tim. You dropped out of your job as a psychology 
teacher in Harvard. Now, what you've dropped into 
is, one: a highly complicated series of arrangements 
for lecturing and for putting on the festival... 

LEARY: Well, I'm dropped out of that. 

GINSBERG: But you're not dropped out of the very 
highly complicated legal constitutional appeal, which 
you feel a sentimental regard for, as I do. You 
haven't dropped out of being the financial provider 
for Millbrook, and you haven't dropped out of plann¬ 
ing and conducting community organization and par¬ 
ticipating in it. 

And that community organization is related to the 
national community, too. Either through the Supreme 
Court, or through the very existence of the dollar 
that is exchanged for you to pay your lawyers, or to 
take money to pay your lawyers in the theatre. So 
you can't drop out, like DROP OUT, 'cause you 
haven't. 

LEARY: Well, let me explain... 

GINSBERG: So they think you mean like , drop out, 
like go live on Haight-Ashbury Street and do nothing 
at all. Even if you can do something like build fur¬ 
niture and sell it, or give it away in barter with some¬ 
body else. 

LEARY: You have to drop out in a group. You drop 
out in a small tribal group. 

SNYDER: Well, you drop out one by one, but... You 
.know, you can join the sub-culture. ry 

GINSBERG: Maybe it's: "Drop out of what?" / 




I want to hear your views on 
that. Now, it's agreed we're 
dropping out, and there are 
techniques to do it. Now, what 
next! Where are we going now ? 
What kind of society are we going to 


Bp LEARY: I'm making the prediction 

fj that thousands of groups will just look 

around the fake-prop-television-set Amer¬ 
ican society, and just open one of those 
doors. When you open the doors, they don't 
lead you in, they lead you out into the garden 
of Eden.. .which is the planet. 

Then you find yourself a little tribe wandering 
around. As soon as enough people do this — young 
people do this — it'll bring about an incredible 
change in the consciousness of this country, and of the 
Western world. 

GINSBERG: Well, that is happening actually... 

LEARY- Yeah, but... 


SNYDER: But 
that garden of 
Eden is full of 
old rubber truck 
tires and tin cans, 
right now, you know. 
LEARY: Parts of it 
are... Each group 
that drops out has got to 
use its two billion years 
of cellular equipment to 
answer those questions: 
"Hey, how we gonna eat? 

Oh, there's no more pay- 
check, there's no more fel¬ 
lowship from the university! 
How we gonna, eat ? How we 
gonna keep warm ? How we gon¬ 
na defend ourselves ? How we 
gonna eat ? How we gonna keep 
warm?" 

Those are exactly the questions 
that cellular animals and tribal groups 
have been asking for thousands of years. 

Each group is going to have to depend 
upon its turned on, psychedelic creativity 
and each group of... 

I can envision ten M. I. T. scientists, 
with their families, they've taken LSD... 
They've wondered about the insane-robot- 
television show of M. I. T. They drop out. 

They may get a. little farm out in Lexing¬ 
ton, near Boston. They rrta.y use their crea¬ 
tivity to make some new kinds of machines 
that will turn people on instead of bomb them. 
Every little group has to do what every little 
group has done throughout history. 

NEW STRUCTURES; NEW TECHNIQUES 
SNYDER: No, they can't do what they've done 
through history. What is very important here 
is, besides taking acid, is that people learn 
the techniques which have been forgotten. That 
they learn new structures, and new techniques. 
Like, you just can't go out and grow vegetables, 
man. You've gotta learn how to do it. Like 
we've gotta, learn to do a lot of things we've for¬ 
gotten to do. 

LEARY: I agree. 

WATTS: That is very true, Gary. Our educa¬ 
tional system, in its entirety, does nothing to 
give us any kind of material competence. In oth¬ 
er words, we don't learn how to cook, how to 
make clothes, how to build houses, how to make 
love, or to do any of the absolutely fundamental 
things of life. 

CEREBRAL “FREAK OUTS” 

The whole education that we get for our 
children in school is entirely in terms of ab¬ 
stractions. It trains you to be an insurance 
n salesman ora bureaucrat, or some kind of 
3 cerebral character. 

LEARY: Yes... it's- exactly there that, I 
t think, a. clear-cut statement is needed. 

The American educational system is a 
narcotic, addictive process... 

WATTS: Right! 

LEARY: ... and we must have nothing 
to do with it. Drop out of school, drop 
out of college, don't be an activist... 
WATTS: But we've got to do something 
else, 

LEARY: Drop out of school.. . 
GINSBERG: Where are you gonna 
learn engineering, or astronomy, or 
anything like that ? 

LEARY: The way men have always 
learned the important things in life. 
Face to face with a. teacher, with a. 
guru. Because very littl a .. 
GINSBERG: What about astrono¬ 


my. .. like calculation of star 
ratios. . .things like that? 

LEARY: If any drop-out wants to 
do that, he can do it. . . I can tell 
him how to do it. 

SNYDER: I would suspect that 
within the next ten years — within 
the next five years probably — a 
"modest jjqginning will be made in 
sub-culture institutions of higher 
learning that will informally begin 
to exist around the country, and 
will provide this kind of education 
without being left to the Establish¬ 
ment, to Big Industry, to govern¬ 
ment. 

WATTS: Well, it's already happen¬ 
ing. .. 

SNYDER: I think that there will be 
a big extension of that, employing 
a lot of potentially beautiful teach¬ 
ers who are unemployed at the 
moment... like there are gurus 
who are just waiting to be put to 
use; and also drawing people, who 
are working in the universities 
with a bad conscience, off to join 
that... 

LEARY: Exactly... 

SNYDER: There's a whole new 
order of technology that is re¬ 
quired for this. A whole new sci¬ 
ence, actually. A whole new phys¬ 
ical science is going to emerge 
from this. Because the boundaries 
of the old physical science are 
within the boundaries of the 
Judaeo- Christian and Western im¬ 
perialist boss sense of the uni¬ 
verse that Alan was talking about. 

In other words, our scientific 
condition is caught within the 
limits of that father figure, Jeho¬ 
vah, or Roman emperor model... 
which limits our scientific objec¬ 
tivity and actually holds us back 
from exploring areas of science 
which can be explored. 

LEARY: Exactly, Gary. Exact¬ 
ly... 

WATTS: It's like the guy in Los 
Angeles who had a bad trip on LSD 
and turned himself into the police, 
and wrote: "Please help me. 

Signed, Jehovah. " (laughter) 
LEARY: Beautiful! (more laugh¬ 
ter) It's about time he caught on, 
huh? (more laughter) 

WATTS: Yes-ss (laughing) But, 
here though, is this thing, you 
see. We are talking about all this, 
which is really a rather small 
movement of people, involved in 
the midst of a fantastic multitude 
of people who can only continue to 
survive if automated industry feeds 
them, clothes them, houses them 
and transports them. By means of 
the creation of immense quantities 
of ersatz material: Fake bread, 
fake homes, fake clothes and fake 
autos. 

In other words, this thing is 
going on. . .you know, huge, fantas¬ 
tic numbers of people... increasing , 
increasing , increasing . .. people 
think the population problem is 
something that's going to happen 
five years from now. They don't 
realize it's right on us now ! 

8 









People are coming out of the 
WALLS! 

SNYDER: And they're gobbling up 
everything on the planet to feed it. 

• WATTS: Right. 

SNYDER: Well, the ecological 
conscience is something that has 
to emerge there, and that's part 
of what we hope for... hopefully 
in the subculture. 

VfA (Voice from the Audience): 
Gary, doesn't Japan clearly indi¬ 
cate that we can go up in an order 
of magnitude in population and 
still... 

SNYDER: Well, who wants to? It 
can be very well argued by some 
people who have not been thinking 
very clearly about it, that we 
could support a larger number of 
people on this planet infinitely. 

But that's irresponsible and sac¬ 
rilegious, It's sacrilegious for 
the simple reason it wipes out too 
many other animal species which 
we have no right to wipe out. 
LEARY: Absolutely. 

SNYDER: We have no moral right 
to upset the ecological balance. 
WATTS: No, that's true. We've 
got to admit that we belong to the 
mutual eating society. 

SNYDER: Furthermore, it simp¬ 
ly isn't pleasant to be crowded 
that way. Human beings lose re¬ 
spect for human beings when 
they're crowded. 

LEARY: Out of my LSD experi¬ 
ences I have evolved a vision 
which makes sense to my cells... 
that we are already putting to work 
at Millbrook. And that is, that 
life on this planet depends upon 
about twelve inches of topsoil and 
the incredible balance of species 
that Gary was just talking about. 

On the other hand, man and his 
technological, Aristotelian zeal 
has developed these‘methods of 
laying down miles of concrete on 
topsoil, polluting the waters and 
doing the damage that Gary was 
just talking about. Now, we cannot 
pay to this society: "Go back to a 
simple, tribal, pastoral exis¬ 
tence. " That's romantic. 

FORWARD 

SNYDER: You can say "Go FOR¬ 
WARD to a. simple, pastoral exis¬ 
tence. " 

LEARY: Yeah. I have come to a 
very simple solution: All thetech- 
nology has to go underground. Be¬ 
cause metal belongs underground. 
You take a hatchet out in the fo¬ 
rest and let it go. It goes exactly 
where God and the Divine Process 
wants it to be: underground. 

Now the city of New York —the 
megalopolis is going to exist from 
Seattle to San Diego in a few years 
— could just as well be under¬ 
ground. If it goes underground 
it's there, where it belongs, with 
fire and metal and steel, 

I foresee that these tribal groups 
that drop out — and I mean abso¬ 
lutely drop out — will be helping 
to get back in harmony with the 
land, and we've got to start im¬ 
mediately putting a technology 
underground. 

I can think of different ways we 



LEGEND 

VfA = Voice from the Audience 

can do this symbolically. The 
Solstice, last April 21st (March 
21st — Oracle) a. group of us went 
out in front of the house in Mill- 
brook and we took a sledgehammer 
and we spent about an hour breaking 
through the road. And we had this 
incredible piece of asphalt and rock— 
about four inches—and then we said: 

"Hey! Underneath this planet some¬ 
where there's dirt!" It was really 
magical. And once you get a little 
piece taken out—it took about an hour to 
get one little piece—then you just go 
underneath it and it begins to crumble. 

So I think we should start a movement 
to—one hour a. day or one hour a week— 
take a little chisel and a little hammer and 
put a little hole in some of this plastic, and 
just see some earth come up, and put a 
seed there. And then put a little ring—man- 
dalic ring—of something around it. 

I can see the highways and I can see the 
subways and I can see the patios and so foith_. 

Suddenly the highway department comes along, 
and: "There's a rose growing in the middle of 
Highway 101!" And then... then... the robot 
power group will have to send a group of the 
highway department to kill the rose and put the 
asphalt down on the gentle, naked skin of the soil. 

Now when they do that, we're getting to them. 

There'll be pictures in the paper. And conscious¬ 
ness is going to change. Because we've got to get 
to people's consciousness. We've got to let people 
realize what they're doing to the earth. 

GINSBERG: That's the area of poetry you're dealing 
with there. 

LEARY: Here we go. I'm the poet and you're the 
politician. I've told you that for ten years! 

GINSBERG: "There are no ideas but in things, " said 
William Carlos Williams. How does this work out now? 

SNYDER: Technologically? 

VfA: I wouldn't want to work underground. 

LEARY: Of course not. The only people that would want 
to work underground are people that would want to work 
with metal and steel. But if they're hung up that way, and 
they want to play with those kinds of symbols, fine. We'll 
have the greatest, air-conditioned, smooth, airport, tile 
gardens for them with all sorts of metal toys to play with. 

VfA: Can I ask you for a clarification on one thing about drop 
out ? You said that in another ten years the young men in the 
colleges are going to have degrees and the doctors, psycholo¬ 
gists and so on, will all be tumed-on people. But if they drop 
out from college now they won't have degrees and these people 
won't gain control of the apparatus—I mean, I know someone 
now at State who studies psychology and who doesn't know 
whether to drop out or not, and who's pulled in two directions. I 
think there are many people like this. 

DROP OUT: YES OR NO 

LEARY: Yes, I think he should drop out. And I want to be abso¬ 
lutely clear on that. NOBODY wants to listen to that simple, 

two-syllable phrase. It gets jargled and jumbled, and I mean it... , , . 

Now, everyone has to decide how he drops out and when, and he has “’T they love.. 

to time it. gracefully, but that's the goal. C ,°“ wlth + university-, 

SNYDER: We understand that... Fine-quit tomorrow. 

LEARY: Well, Allen didn't. And Allen, I want you to tell the ^herefore, I have to detach my- 
people in Berkeley that ask you what I mean, I mean absolute - se ^ s l°wly. . en was in n la. 
ly’ have nothing to do with the university, and start planning a ?°\! * , , . , 

step by step how you can detect... GINSBERG: India.... but look.. you 

GINSBERG: Of course, that's where the big argument is, know the university is personal rec¬ 
over the NON-STUDENTS.- The guys that dropped out tionships also. They re in contact with 
are not involved, and their problem is what kind of persons They can't reject those persons 

communities they organize. necessarily... There might be a. Bodhisattva 

LEARY: Now, I can foresee that you might work a mon g those persons. 


should violate contracts 


for Sears & Roebuck for six months to get enough 


SNYDER: ... as Tim says, you can gracefully 


money to go to India. But that's part of your 
drop out. And what I'm doing today, Allen, is 
part of my drop out. I've got responsibilities, 
contracts, .and I don't think that anyone 


drop out... 

LEARY: Aesthetically... 

SNYDER: ... at one time or another, which I take 





GINSBERG: I was teaching at 
Berkeley last week — what do you 
mean ’dropout?' (laughs) 

LEARY: You've got to do your yoga 
as a college professor... it's part 
of the thing you're gonna have to go 
through, and after' you do that then 
(laughs) you shudder and run to the 
door. 

SAGES IN THE MOUNTAINS 


WATTS: Surely the fact of the matter is 
that you can do this on a small scale, as 
an individual, where just a few people are 
doing this... as they always have done. 

There have always been a kind of elite mi¬ 
nority who dropped out — who were the 
sages in the mountains. 

But now we are in a position where the con- 


In other words, if the manufacturer is going to be able to 
sell his products, the people gotta have money to pay for 
the products. All those people have been put out of work 
by the machines the manufacturer is using. Therefore, 

the people have got to be paid by the government- 

CREDIT of some kind, so they can buy what the ma¬ 
chines produce — then the thing will go on. 

• So this means that thousands and thousands of peo¬ 
ple are going to be loafing around, with nothing at 
all to do. A few people who are maniacs for work 
will go on... 

LEARY: I think what you're defining, Alan, 



WATTS: But that's the kind of situation we? re 
moving into, IF wf> survive at all. 

LEARY: Well, there's another possibili¬ 
ty. And, I think you're defining two pos¬ 
sible new species. Let's face it, the 
evolution of mankind is not over. 

WATTS: 


versations that you and I have go to millions, 
and people are asking this sort of question. 

Let's suppose that everybody in San Francis¬ 
co decided to take the six o'clock train from the 
Third Street Station to Palo Alto... See? We 
know there's no chance of their doing so. And 
therefore this catastrophe doesn't happen. 

LEARY: That's exactly what I say to people who 
say:* "Well, suppose everyone dropped out?" Ridi¬ 
culous ! 

WATTS: Yeati, supposing everyone dropped out... 
Of course they're not going to. 

LEARY: Suppose everyone took LSD tonight (laughs) 
—Great! TH E LEISURE SOCIETY: 

PUZZLES AND PARADOXES 


WATTS: The thing is this: what we are facing, what's 
going to happen is this... if we do not encounter the final 
political catastrophe of atomic war, biological warfare 
and wipe the whole thing out, we're going to have a huge 
leisure society — where they're going to reverse taxation 
and PA*? people for the work that the machines do for them. 
Because there's no other solution to it. 


LEARY: Just as there are many 
kinds of primates: baboons and 
chimpanzees and so forth. In a few 
thousand years we'll look back 
and see that from — what we 
call man — there may be two 
or more new specie s-develo- 
ping. 

There's no question that 
one species, which could 
and probably will develop, 
is this anthill. It's run 
like a beehive with 
queens—or kings— 

(laughs) and it'll 
all be television and 
now, of course, in 
that, sexuality will, 
become very pro¬ 
miscuous and 
almost imper¬ 
sonal. Be¬ 
cause, in an 



anthill, it always turns out that way. 

BUT you're gonna have another species 
who inevitably will survive, and that will 
be the tribal people, who won't have to 
worry about leisure because when you drop 
out then the real playwork begins. Because 
then you have to, as Gary says, learn .how 
to take care of yourself and your loved ones 
on this... 

SNYDER: I don't think that you're right 
about that anthill thing at all though. That's a 
very negative view of human nature. I don't 
think it's accurate. 

LEARY: It's no longer even human nature. We 
won't call them human anymore. These people 

HUMAN BEINGS WANT REALITY 
SNYDER: C'mon, Tim, they're humans and 
they're gonna be here. You're talking a drama 
now. You'rd'hot talking about —you know— an¬ 
thropological realities. The anthropological re¬ 
ality is that human beings, in their nature, want 
to be in touch with what is real in themselves and 
in the universe. 

For example, the longshoremen with their auto¬ 
mation contract in San Francisco... a. certain 
number of them have been laid off for the rest of 
their lives with full pay, and some of them have 
been laid off already for five years —with full pay— 
by their contract. 

Now, my brother-in-law is a longshoreman, and 
he's been telling me about what's happening to these 
guys. Most of them are pretty illiterate, a large 
portion of them are Negroes. The first thing they all 
did was get boats and drive around San Francisco Bay 
... .because they have all this leisure. 

Then a lot of them got tired driving around boats that 
were just like cars, and they started sailing. Then a 
few of them started making their own sailboats. They 
move into and respond to the possibility of challenge. 

Things become simpler and more complex and more 
challenging for them. The same is true of hunting. Some 
guy says "I want to go hunting and fishing all the time, 
when I have my leisure.. .by God!" So he goes hunting all 
the time. Then he says, "I want to do this in a more in¬ 
teresting way. " So he takes up'bow hunting... Then the 
next step is — and this has happened — he says, "I wantto 
try making my own arrowheads. " And he learns how to 
flake his own arrowheads out. 

Now, human beings want reality. That's, I think, part 
of human nature. And television and drinking beer and 
watching television, is what the working man laid off 
does for the first two weeks. 

But then in the third week he begins to get bored, 
and'in the fourth week he wants to do something with 
his body and his mind and his senses. 

LEARY: But if he's still being paid by the Estab¬ 
lishment, then you have someone who's going 
back to childhood. Like, he's making arrows 
that he doesn't really need... 

SNYDER: May I speak my vision about this ? 
LEARY: I object to that very much. I want 
him out there really fighting — not fighting, 
but working — for his family, not chipping.. 
SNYDER: Well, this is a transitional 
thing, too. . . It's too transitional. 
GINSBERG: This leads to violence because 
it divides everybody up into two sepa¬ 
rate. . . 

SNYDER: Oh, he was talking poetry. 




















LEARY: No, I'm not! I want to be 
clear about this. Nobody wants to 
listen to this. We are doing this al¬ 
ready. .. 

SNYDER: No, but the difference is, 
the children of the ants are all going 
to be tribal people. That's the way 
it's going to work. We're going to get 
the kids, and it's going to take about 
three generations. 

THE CHANGE 

And in the meantime, the family sys¬ 
tem will change, and when the family 


ing and preparing food. Because that has taste. 

And I see that it will be a. sort of flip, that as all 
the possibilities of technology and automation make 
it possible for everybody to be assured of having the 
basic necessities of life.. .they will then say: "Oh, 
yes, we have all that. Now we can always rely on 
that, but now in the meantime while we don't have to 
work, let's go back to making arrowheads and to rais¬ 
ing the most AMAZING PLANTS. " 

SNYDER: Yeah... It would be so funny; the thing is 
that they would all get so good at it that the technology 
center of Chicago would rust away, (laughter) 
WATTS: Right! Right! (laughter) 

LEARY: That's exactly what's going to happen. The 


system changes the economy willchange... psychedelic drop-outs are going to be having so much 

onrl in tho mnnnliwvn o nnvnKnn nm'l fun OYY1T1CT t fi VlP SO TTHinh flhviOUSlv tlG 3.It tllG I*. 


n the meantime, a number of spirit¬ 
ual insights are going to change the minds 
of the technologists and the scientists 
themselves, and technology will change. 

There will be a diffused and decentral¬ 
ized technology... as I see it... 

WATTS: Well, go on.. .Are you saying now 
what you said was your vision? 

SNYDER: Now, what I was going to say was 
very simply this. 

I think that automation in the affluent soci¬ 
ety, plus psychedelics, plus—for the same 
curious reason—a whole catalytic, spiritual 
change or bend of mind that seems to be tak¬ 
ing place in the west, today especially, is 
going to result—can result ultimately—in a 
vast leisure society in which people will volun¬ 
tarily reduce their number, and because human 
beings want to do that which is real... simplify 
their lives. 

The whole problem of consumption and mar-- 
keting is radically altered if a large number of 
people voluntarily choose to consume less. 

And people will voluntarily choose to consume 
less if their interests are turned in any other dir¬ 
ection. 

If what is exciting to them is no longer things 
but states of mind. 

LEARY: That's true. 


fun. They're going to be so much obviously healthier. 
WATTS: But Tim, do you see any indication among 
people who at present are really turned on, that they 
are cultivating this kind of material competence? Now, 
I haven't seen too much of it yet... 

SNYDER: Some of those kids at Big Sur have got it. 

WATTS: Yeah, maybe you're right. 

SNYDER: They're learning. A few years ago they 
used to go down to Big Sur and they didn't know how to 
camp or dig latrines. 


STATES OF MIND 

SNYDER: Now what is something else... 

People are becoming interested in states of mind, 
and things are not going to substitute for states of 
mind. So what I visualize is a very complex and 
sophisticated cybernetic technology surrounded by 
thick hedges of trees... 

Somewhere, say around Chicago. And the rest of 
the nation a buffalo pasture... 

LEARY: That's very close to what I think. 

SNA DER:... with a large number of people going 
around making their own arrowheads because it's fun, 
but they know better... (laughter) They know they don't 
have to make them, (more laughter) 

LEARY: Now, this seems like our utopian visions are 
coming closer together. I say that the industry should 
be underground, and you say it should be in Chicago. 
This interests me. 

WATTS: Well, it's the same idea. 

SNYDER: Well, those who want to be technological en¬ 
gineers will be respected... And the other thing is 
that you can go out and live close to nature, or you 
can go back and... 

LEARY: But you won't be allowed to drive a car 
outside this technological... 

SNYDER: But you won't want to! 

That's the difference, baby. It's not that you 
won't be allowed to, it's that you won't want to. 

That's where it's got to be at. 

CIVILIZED “PAP” 

WATTS: Because, it's the same thing when 
we get down to, say, the fundamental 
question of food. More and more one re¬ 
alizes that the mass producedfood 


wortheating, and therefore, in order to 
delight in things to eat, you go back to 
the most primitive processes of rais- 


TECHNOLOGICAL HANDBOOK 
But like what Martine has been telling me lately, is 
that they're getting very sharp about what to gather 
that's edible, how to get sea salt, what are the edible 
plants and the edible seeds, and the revolutionary 
technological book for this state is A. L. Kroeber's 
Handbook of the California. Indians , which tells 
you what's good to eat and how to prepare it. 

And also what to use for tampax: milk¬ 
weed fluff... (laughter) Diapers made of 
shredded bark... The whole thing is all 
there. 

LEARY: Beautiful... 

WATTS: But the thing is this. I've 
found so many people who are the 
turned on type, and the circum¬ 
stances and surroundings under 
which they live are just plain 
cruddy. You would think that 
people who have seen what you 
can see with the visions of psy¬ 
chedelics would reflect themselves 
in forms of life and art that would 
be like Persian miniatures. Be¬ 
cause obviously Persian minia- 
t ures and Moorish arabesques are 
all reflecting the state of mind of 
people who were turned on. And they 
are rich and glorious beyond belief. 

GINSBERG: Majestic. 

WATTS: Majestic! Yeah! Well now, why 
doesn't it so occur... It is slowly beginning to 
happen... 'Cause I've noticed that, recently, all 
turned on people are becoming more colorful. 
They're wearing beads and gorgeous clothes 
and so on and so forth... and it's gradually 
coming out. Because you remember the old 
beatnik days when everybody was in blue jeans 
and ponytails and no lipstick and DRAB—and 
CRUMMY! 

SNYDER: What! (laughter) 

WATTS: Now, something's beginning to happen! 
SNYDER: Well, it wasn't quite that bad, but we 
were mostly concerned with not being consumers 
then... and so we were showing our non-consumer- 
ness. 

WATTS: Yes, I know! The thing is I am using this 
as a symbol because the poor cons in San Quentin 
wear blue jeans. 

SNYDER: The thing is that there are better things in 
the Goodwill now than there used-to be. 

WATTS: Yes, exactly, (laughter) But the thing is that 
now I see it beginning to happen. Timothy here, instead 
of wearing his old—whatever it was he used to wear—has 
got a white tunic on with gold and colorful gimp o 


GINSBERG: Gimp? 







and all that kind of thing, and color is at last coining into the scene. 
SNYDER: That's going back before the Roundheads, and before 
Cromwell... 

WATTS: Yes, it is. 

LEARY: Let's get practical here, I think we're all concerned 
’ t the increasing number of people who are dropping out and 
ing where to go from there. Now let's come up with 
some practical suggestions which we might hope we could un¬ 
fold in the next few months. 

BUSH, FARM, CITY 

SNYDER: There's three categories: wilderness, rural, 
and urban. Like there’s gonna.be bush people, farm peo¬ 
ple and city people. Bush tribes, farm tribes, and city 
tribes. 

LEARY: Beautiful. That makes immediate sense to 


technology. Somehow they come together, and 
there is an increase in technology, and technological 
facility, there is an increase in what we usually 
call human evil. 

SNYDER: I wouldn't agree with that.. .no, there's 
all kinds of non-evil technologies. Like, neo¬ 
lithic obsidian flaking is technology. 

VfA: But in its advanced state it produces 
| evil... 

WATTS: Yes, but what you mean, I think, is 
this: When you go back to the great myths 
about the origin of evil, actually the Hebrew 
words which say good and evil as the know¬ 
ledge of good and evil being the result of 
eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge... 

ANALYTICAL LAG 

These words mean advantageous and dis¬ 
advantageous and they're words connected 
with technical skills. And the whole idea is 
this, which you find reflected in the Taoist 
philosophy, that the moment you start inter¬ 
fering in the course of nature with a mind 
that is centered and one-pointed, and anal¬ 
yzes everything, and breaks it down into 
bits... The moment you do that you lost con¬ 
tact with your original know-how.. .by 
means of which you now color your eyes, 
breathe, and beat your heart. 

For thousands of years mankind has 
lost touch with his original intelligence, 
and he has be’en absolutely fascinated by 
' this kind of political, godlike, controlling 
intelligence.. .where you can go ptt-ptt-ptt- 
ptt... and analyze things all over the place, 
and he has forgotten to trust his own organ- 

Now the whole thing is that everything is 
coming to be realized today. Not only through 
people who take psychedelics, but also through 
many scientists. They're realizing that this lin¬ 
ear kind of intelligence cannot keep up with the 
course of nature. It can only solve trivial problem 
when the big problems happen too fast to be thought 
about in that way. 

So, those of us who are in some way or other— 
through psychedelics, through meditation, through 
what have you—are getting back to being able to trust 
our original intelligence... are suggesting an entirely 
new course for the development of civilization. 

SNYDER: Well, it happens that civilization develops with 
the emergence of a class structure. A class structure 
can't survive, or can't put across its principle, and expect 
people to accept it... if they believe in themselves. If they 
believe, individually, one by one, that they are in some way 
godlike, or buddha like, or potentially illuminati. 

• So it's almost ingrained in civilization, and Freud said this, 
you know "Civilization as a Neurosis, " that part of the nature of 
civilization is that it must PUT DOWN the potential of every indi¬ 
vidual development'. 

PRIVATE VISIONS 

This is the difference between that kind of society which we call 
civilized, and that much more ancient kind of society, which is still vi- 


kable and still survives, and which we call 
jjfeg-i mitive. In which everybody is potenti- 
ally a chief and which everybody... like the 
Comamche or the Sioux... EVERYBODY in 
the whole culture.. .was expected to go out 
and have^. vision one time in his life. 

In other words, to leave the society to 
have some transcendental experience, to 
have a song and a totem come to him which 
he need tell no one, ever—and then come 
back and live with this double knowledge in 


ing had his own isolation, his own loneli¬ 
ness, and his own vision, he knows that 
the game rules of society are fundament¬ 
ally an illusion. 

SNYDER: The society not only permits 
that, the society is built on it... 

WATTS: Is built on that, right! 

SNYDER: And everybody has one side of 
3 nature that has been out of it. 

That society is strong and v 
ble which recognizes its own provisional- 
ity. 

SNYDER: And no one who ever came into 
contact with the Plains Indians didn't 
think they were men! Every record of 
American Indians from the c 
pioneers, the missionaries, the Span! 
ards... say that every one of these 
people was men. 

In fact, I learned something just the 
^mtherday. Talking about the Uroe Indi¬ 
ans , an early explorer up there comment¬ 
ed on their fantastic self-confidence. He 
said, "... Every Indian has this fantastic 
self-confidence. And they laugh at me, " 
he said, "they laugh at me and they say: 
'Aren't you sorry you're not an Indian.' 
Poor wretched Indians!" (laughs) this 
fellow said. 

ALONE AND AT ONE 

Well, that is because every one of them 
has gone out and had this vision experi¬ 
ence. .. has been completely alone with 
himself, and face to face with himself... 
and has contacted powers outside of whate# 
anything the society could give him, and so¬ 
ciety expects him to contact powers out¬ 
side of society... in those cultures. 

WATTS: Yes, every healthy culture does. 
Every healthy culture provides for there 
being non-joiners. Sanyassi, hermits, 
drop-outs too... Every healthy society has 
to tolerate this... 

SNYDER: A society like the Comanche or 
the Sioux demands that everybody go out 
there and have this vision, and incorpor¬ 
ates and ritualizes it within the culture. 
Then a society like India, a. step more civ¬ 
ilized, permits some individuals to have 
these visions, but doesn't demand ft of 
everyone. And then later it becomes pure¬ 
ly eccentric. 

LEARY: We often wonder why some people 
are more ready to drop out than others. It 
may be explained by the theory of reincar¬ 
nation. The people that don't want to drop 
out can't conceive of living on this planet 
outside of the prop television studio, are 
just unlucky enough to have been born into 
this sort of thing?.. maybe the first or 
second time. They're still entranced by all 
of the manmade props. But there's no 
question that we should consider how more 
and more people, who are ready to drop 
out, can drop out, 

WATTS: If there is value in being a drop¬ 
out. . . that is to say, being an outsider... 
You can only appreciate and realize this 
value, if there are in contrast with you in¬ 
siders and squares. The two are mutually 



supportive. 

LEARY: Yeah, if someone says to me, "I just can't'con¬ 
ceive of dropping out... " I can say, "Well, you're having 
fun with this go around... fine! We've all done it many 
times in the past. " 

GINSBERG: The whole thing is too big because it doesn't 
say drop out of WHAT precisely. What everybody is 
g with is people, it's not dealing with instituti 
leafing with them but also dealing with people. 

Wo rising- with and including the police. 

SNYDER: If you're going to talk this way you ha' 
to be able to specifically say to somebody ii 
ta, Kansas who says, "I'm going to drop ou 
do you advise me to stay living around here 
area which I like?" 

LEARY: Let's be less historical now for a\ 
and let's be very practical about ways in 
people who want to find the tribal way.. 
can they do it.. .what do you tell them? 

SNYDER: Well, this is what I've been 
kids all over Michigan and Kansas. ~ 
example, I tell them first of all: "E 
want to live here, or do you want to 
someplace 
LEARY: Go< 


that there will be city people as'well 
as country people and mountain peo¬ 
ple. .. I would suggest that for the next 
year or two or three, which are gonna 
be nervous, transitional, mutational 
years—where things are gonna happen 
very fast, by the way—the transition 
could be facilitated if every City set up little 
meditation rooms, little sRne rooms, where 
the people in transition, dropping out, could 
meet and meditate toge 
It's already happening at the Psychedelic 
Shop, it's happening in New York. I see n 
reason though why there shouldn't be tenj 
teen or twenty such places in San Francj 
SNYDER: There already are. 

ENERGY TO CREJrf 


L‘AND, WATER AND CLOUDS 
SNYDER: All right, they say IyvB 
■) stay where I am, I say, c‘ 


LEARY: I know, but let’s encourage that. I-was 
just in Seattle and I was urging the people there. Hun¬ 
dreds of them crowd into coffee shops, and there is 
this beautiful energy. 

They Rtre liberated people, these kids, but they don't 
know where to go. They don't need leadership, but ti 
need, I think, a variety of suggestions from people 
have thou glu about this, giving them the options to*move in 
any direction. The different meditation rooms can have dif- 
iut styles. One can be Zen, one can be macrobiotic, one 
be bhglMchanting, one can be rock and roll psychedelic, 
lights. 

learn anything from our cells, we learn that God de¬ 
in variety. The more of these we can encourage, 
people wouldswreet in these places, and AUTOMATICALLY 
tribal grOTps would develop and new matings would^M 
and the city should be seen for many as 
al... and they get started. They may save up a little 
money, and then they head out and find the Indian 

irever they go. • ’ 

A MAGIC GEOGRAPHY 

SNYDER: Well, the Indian totem is right under • '• 

your ground in the city, is right under your feet, 
just like when you become initiated,into the Hai- 
neph pueblo, which is near Albuquerque, you 
learn the magic geography of your region; and part 
of that means going to the center of Albuquerque and A 
being told: There is a spring here at a certain street, 
and its name is such and such. And that's in a street cor¬ 
ner in downtown Albuquerque. 

But they have that geography intact, you know. They 
haven't forgotten it. Long after Albuquerque is gone, 
somebody'll be coming there, saying there's a spring here 
and it'll be there, probably. 

LEARY: Tremont Street in Boston means "three hills. " 
GINSBERG: There's a stream under Greenwich Village 
• VTA: Gary, what do you think of rejecting the week as 
a measure of time; as a sort of absurd, civilized 
measure of time, and replacing it with a month, which 
is a natural time cycle? 

LEARY: What is the time cycle? 

SNYDER: The week, the seven day week. Well, 
the seven day week is simply based on the Old 
Testament theory that the world was created in 
seven,days, you know. So you don't need it, par- 


.. V-J 


in touch with the Indian culture here. 

Find out what was here before. Find 
out what the mythologies were. Find 
out what the local deities were. You can 
get all of this out of books. 

Go and look at your local archaeologica 
sites. Pay a reverend visit to the local 
American Indian tombs, and also the tombs 
of the early American settlers. Find out 
what your original ecology was. Is it short 
grass prairie, or long grass prairie here? 

Go out and live on the land for awhile. Set 
up a tent and camp out and watch the clouds 
and watch the water and watch the land and get 
a sense of what the climate here is. 
since you've been living in a house all your 
you probably don't know what the climate is. 

LEARY: Beautiful. 

SNYDER: Then decide how you want to make 
living here. Do you want to be a farmer, or 
want to be a hunter and food gatherer? 

You know, you start from the ground up, and you 
can do it in any part of this country today... cities whicll is that every seve 

and all_For this continent I took it back to the Ihdi- ^ to 00 f j t t s to 

ans. Find out what the Indians were up to in your own the w h 0 le thing. The r 
area. Whether it's Utah, or Kansas, or New Jersey. - •— 

LEARY: That is a stroke of cellular revelation and 
genius, Gary. That's one of the wisest things I've 
heard anyone say in years. Exactly how it should be 


(ticularly. 

VfA: Right. It seems to me a formal rejec¬ 
tion of it and a cycling of social everifs||| 
around the idea of monthly cycle... 
i HOLY DAY! 

WATTS: I don't agree with that, be¬ 
cause. .. everywhere that this week thing 

has spread,'people have adopted it, 

1 where they didn't have this time rhythm 
before. But people have not under¬ 
stood the real meaning of the week, 
which is that every seventh day is a 
Ts to Burn out of 
The rules are ab~ 
'The six days thou shalt 
>r, and do all that thou has to 
The seventh day thou shalt 
:eep holy. " HOLY DAY! and 


I do see the need for transitions, though, and you say 











this means holiday. It means instead of a day for lay¬ 
ing on rationality and preaching and making everybody 
feel guilty because they didn't operate properly the 
other six days. 

LEARY: You turn on. 

WATTS: The seventh day is the day... Yes, absolute¬ 
ly, to go crazy... Because if you can't afford a little 
corner of craziness in your life, you're like a steel 
bridge that has no give. You're so rigid you're going 
to collapse in the first wind. 

LEARY: There is also some neuro-pharmacologica.1 
evidence in support of the weekly cycle. That is, 
you can only have a full-scale LSD session about 
once a week. And when they said in Genesis—actu¬ 
ally it's the first page of Genesis—"On the seventh 
day He rested, " it makes very modern sense. 
GINSBERG: You can interpret it psychedelically, 
but that's like new criticism... (laughter) You 
can actually LIKE new criticism... 

LEARY: I want you to be very loving to me for 
the rest of... and the tape will be witness... 
whether Allen is loving or not to me, for the rest 
of this evening. 

GINSBERG: That’s all right, I can always use a 
Big Brother... 

WATTS: May I point out, this has directly to do 
with what we've been talking about. 

GINSBERG: But I was just getting paranoid of you 
interpreting the Old Testament as a prophecy of 
LSD. That's what I was THINKING. 

LEARY: My foot has often led to other people's 
paranoias at the time. 

WATTS: One day in seven, one seventh, is the day 
of the drop out. 

SNYDER: That's not enough, (laughter) 

WATTS: Now wait a. minute. You're going too fast, 
Gary. 

VfA: Gary, the first six days of the week you drop out, 
and the seventh day you work. 

SNYDER: Baby, we've gotta, get away from this distinc¬ 
tion between work and play. That's .the whole thing, 
really. Like this one day in seven thing, the reason I 
don't agree with it is that it implies that making the 
world was a job. 

WATTS: Oh, that's perfectly true. I entirely agree with 
you on that. 

A BAD SCENE 


SNYDER: And any universe that is worth creating isn't 
any job to create. You dig it. I don’t sympathize with 
his fatigue at all... He must have made a bad scene, 
(chuckles) 

b WATTS: You are talking on a different level than we're 
f discussing at the moment. You are talking from the 
point of view where from the very deepest vision every- 
. thing that happens is okay, and everything is play. 

SNYDER: Well, I wasn't really talking from that vision. 

“ WATTS: Well, that's where you really are. Now, I’m 
going one level below this, and saying... 
k SNYDER: What I'm saying is if you do enjoy what you're 
I going, it's not work. 

I WATTS: That's true. That's my own philosophy: that I 
J get paid for playing. 

Now, the thing is, though, that just as talking on a little 
bit lower level.. .now—one day in seven is for goofing off.'.. 
and that's a certain less percentage. So in a culture, if 
the culture is to be healthy, there has to be a substantial 
but, nevertheless, minority percentage of people who are 
not involved in the ratrace. 

And this is the thing that it seems to me is coming out of 
this. We cannot possible expect that everybody in the United 
States of America will drop out. But it is entirely import¬ 
ant for the welfare of the United States that a certain number 
of people, a certain percentage, should drop out. Just as 
one day in seven should be a holiday. 

VfA: That's the baby that's being born,- That's the baby 
that's being bom NOW. The problem that we have to deal 
with is how to get that baby out easily. 

LEARY: I think we must be more practical than we have 
been, because there are hundreds and thousands of 
people who are very interested in what we are talking 
about in the most A-B-C practical sense like: What do 
1 i I do tomorrow! 


WATTS: Right! 

RIGHT OCCUPATION 

SNYDER: The subject is money, and point two is: 
right occupation, which is the sixth or the seventh 
stage in the eight fold path of the Buddha.. 

WATTS: Now, I want to put what I've said and what 
you've said together to make it one. 

LEARY: Everyone has to become a. Buddha. 

WATTS: Those people who drop out are the ones who 
make work and play the same. 

LEARY: That's a great slogan! 

VfA: You said earlier that when automation comes 
people will be paid not to work. 

WATTS: Yes. 

VfA: Automation is already come in this country... 
WATTS: It's coming, yes. 

VfA: .. .but the country hasn't learned how to solve 
the problem of distribution. So it has a war in Viet¬ 
nam to get rid of its surplus products... 

WATTS: Exactly, because we are still under the 
superstition that money is real. 

VfA: If now, people started dropping out—the most 
turned on people started dropping out—instead of 
guiding our already automated society into a time 
when we can have leisure so that we can go into our¬ 
selves and become mal people... if all these people 
drop out, isn't there a danger that it will leave the 
non-turned on people in control of the machine, and it 
would just be Vietnam after Vietnam ? 

LEARY: No. 

VfA: Because they react! 

LEARY: Exactly, you see the only way to stop the 
war in Vietnam is for a hundred high school kids to 
quit school tomorrow. Don't picket, don’t get in¬ 
volved in it at all.. .because they're watching... 
WATTS: And there'll be too many to be picked off 
one by one. 

CAESAR’S GARDEN 

LEARY: Caesar watches! He's watching, and every 
time we dig a little hole in the pavement and plant a 
rose, a hundred thousand consciousnesses are 
changed. 

Don't worry about it. We can have nothing to do 
with the steel. We can't fight with Caesar over who's 
going to run the television-prop-fake-show. The only 
way to end the war in Vietnam is to let's ALL drop 
out and change the American consciousness as 
quickly as possible. 

WATTS: Well, fundamentally it's always been said 
and I think... 

GINSBERG: Now, what can I drop out of? 

LEARY: Don't take your teaching post at Cal. 
GINSBERG: Don't take my teaching post at Cal... 
That's one way, but that involves money. I need the 
money. 

VfA: You should just give it away. 

GINSBERG: But I've been giving it away.. .that's why 
I need the money, (laughter) The diggers say aban¬ 
don money... 

VfA: You don't necessarily have to abandon it. 
LEARY: Get rid of it. Pass it on faster and 
faster... 

VfA: Money is stored energy—it may be real or it 
may not be real and should be given away within the 
community. 

GINSBERG: What about Pound's idea of money? 

Pound said that where money came from was that 
somebody got a million dollars in gold, and then the 
government gave him sixteen million dollars credit. 

In other words, he could issue sixteen million dol¬ 
lars worth of dollars—for a million in gold. So just 
the people who had that gold, presumably, had credit. 
So Pound's idea was that all credit should come from 
the government. 

SNYDER: Well, within the subculture it moves more 
and more towards exchange, toward giving arid ex¬ 
changing of what you've created, arid getting food for 
pawns, literally... and keeping it within the commun¬ 
ity. 

GINSBERG: What if you want a piano ? 

LEARY: Different ones of us, at different times, 


have more energy that can interact with the culture. 

In the last four months, I have been making about 
eight thousand dollars a week and I didn't have enough 
money in Seattle yesterday to buy a package of cig¬ 
arettes. Let's go on, and be more practical. 
SNYDER: Well, I think there are two problems 
with practicality. The one is right now, and the 
second is when technological advances have made 
. mass unemployment. I mean this society at 
1 least, is moving towards the point when every- 
1 body will just be given money. 

As a matter of fact, the American economy 
could afford right now to put everybody on a 
. minimum income dole. And it would cost them 
less, probably, than the one-tenth that goes into 
[ social work. 

MONEY, MONEY, MONEY 

WATTS: And incidentally, Gary, it would cost us 
less to bribe the whole of Asia than to fight any 
wars there. 

SNYDER: Just dump money on China. 

WATTS: To dump money on China, to give ev¬ 
erybody enough clothes, enough food, enough 
housing, it would cost us less than fighting the 
I Vietnam war! 

' SNYDER: So the problem of bread is merely an 
interim problem, and I see it as being a question 
of flexibility, and willingness, and a. boddhissatva. 
spirit of service... like being willing to work for 
the post office. It's a temporary problem. 
GINSBERG: If we were to bribe Asia... .bribe Chi¬ 
na., and feed China and everything like that... how 
could we do that and simultaneously drop out into 
purely separated pueblos, or family units, or tribes? 
LEARY: Well, that's a. fantasy of the times. A de¬ 
lightful fantasy to show the ridiculousness of the 
robot-fake-prop-television show. 

Now Practical Step Number One, I suggest, is 
that we encourage, in every way we can, including 
with our 'energies, the setting up of meditation cen¬ 
ters of tribal landing pads in all the cities of the 
United States. 

I would say Step Number Two would be to. .. 


GINSBERG: That requires a. corporation, doesn't it? 

SNYDER: No, it doesn't. 

LEARY: Not at all! Nothing like that. It requires Ron and Jay, 
who've already done that. 

SNYDER: But it requires that you be able to serve food next... 
Any good ashram serves food. 

LEARY: So the Diggers have been starting on that. 

SNYDER: So now where are we gonna, get the food? 

GINSBERG: The International Society for Krishna Consciousness 
is incorporated. 

VfA: You get the food by acquiring land. That's the basic thing, 
to acquire land for people to go to. 

LEARY: That's Step Number Three. As the people move from 
the city they've got to meet each other and form these tribal... 

I would say, reincarnation groups because the people who are 
ready to drop out and turn on will come to these centers and 
they'll wander around and they'll form natural cellular groups 
and they will leave the city. 

A MODEL BE-IN 

I would suggest, as Practical Step Number Two, that the 
Human Be-In in San Francisco be a model. We've all tried dif¬ 
ferent models of summer schools, of institutes and research 
projects and individual drop-outs... psychedelic celebrations 
and so forth... and the Avalon and Fillmore and so forth... 

I would say that the human Be-In was a. tremendously import¬ 
ant thing in the consciousness of San Francisco. Now if that 
thing could happen in every large city in the country... And 
again, the beautiful thing about the Be-In was it had no leader¬ 
ship, it had no big financing, it will just grow automatically. 
GINSBERG: Yeah, but we're accused of being the leaders. 

We're not, though, you know. What were WE doing up on that 
platform ? 

LEARY: That's a charge that doesn't bother me at all. 

VfA: There were fifty people up on that platform and every one 
of them was a leader. So were the people in the audience. The 
reason was that nobody came out and said, "We 1 ARE the 
leaders," because that's bullshit! 

GINSBERG: Nobody claims to be the leader, but I remember 
sitting up-there showing my body off. 

VfA: Every time they say "you're a. leader," you point to Snyder, 
you see? 

GINSBERG: Well, I do that anyway. 

SNYDER: Yeah, I know, but the press has a. leadership complex. 



WATTS: Oh, they want to find 
the ringleaders... 

GINSBERG: Yeah, they keep 
calling Gary my disciple... 
and they have me blowing his 
conch horn. 

WHO’S IN CHARGE? 

WATTS: ...one of the four 
philosophical questions is: 

Who started it? And whenever 
the police or the press barge 
into a situation, they want to 
know who started it. 

In other words, because 
they're still thinking about God 
and the first cause and they 
want to know... 

LEARY: Who's in charge... 
WATTS: ...who started, who's 
in charge, and so on... 

LEARY: Who get's the credit, 
who gets the blame... 

WATTS: Let's get back to a 
fundamental thing. I think that 
what you are really—all of 
you—are having the courage to 




MAHA-LILA 

It just occurred to me, the practical details... The model of it 
s something like the Maha-lila. Like, you're asking, how's it 
going to work? 

Well, now, the Maha-lila is a group of about three differ¬ 
ent families who have sort of pooled their resources. 


from p. 15 . . .. 

say, is that, the 
absolutely primary thing is 
that there be a. change of con¬ 
sciousness in the individual... 
that he escape from the halluci- i 
nation that he is a. separate ego 
in an alien universe and that we 
all come to realize, primarily, that 
each one of us is the whole works. 

ALWAYS 

Each one of us is what is real and has 
been real for always and always and al¬ 
ways and will ever be... 

And although the time language may not 
be appropriate here, nevertheless, we are 
that, and to the extent that it can't be spread 
around... That's what you and I are, and we 
lose our anxieties and we lose our terror of 
death, and our own unimportance. . . 

That this is the absolutely essential ingredient, they had a. banner which said 
which if we get hold of that point, all the rest will Maha-lila. Like, that was 
be added unto you... In the sense of, "Seek you first their CLAN banner, 
the kingdom of God and all these things shall be add- LEARY: Yeah, I sa 
ed to you. " that... That's the 

SNYDER: Right. model. 

WATTS: Isn't that what you're saying? I mean, isn't SNYDER: That's 
that absolutely basic? And even if this is only realized the model... 
among a statistical minority (crash in background of -And the 


I would like to suggest 
that June twenty-first, which 
is the summer solstice, we 
try to have an enormous ser¬ 
ies of Be-Ins in which... 
GINSBERG: June twenty-first ? 

SNYDER: The summer solstice. 

LEARY: April twenty-first we 
have Be-Ins in different cities... 


of which are very great. But they have decided to play WATTS: No, March the twenty-first 
together and to work together and to take care of each is the spring... 
other and that means all of them have ways of gett- SNYDER: The equinox is on March 
ing a small amount of bread, which they share. twenty-first, solstice is June twenty- 
And other people contribute a. little money when first. 

it comes in. And then they work together on GINSBERG:' What's an equinox? 
creative projects... like they're working SNYDER: That's when the nights and days 
together on a light show right now for a are equal. 

poetry reading that we're going to give. LEARY: Wherever I said April, I want to take 
And they consider themselves a that back. I should have said March, 
kind of extended family or clan. GINSBERG: Solstice? 

When they went to the Be-In, WATTS: The sun's standing still at Xmas and 
midsummer... 

SNYDER: Midsummer's night. 

I think we should encourage extended families every¬ 
where. 

WATTS: Well, it's very practical to encourage ex¬ 
tended families because the present model of the family 
is a. hopeless breakdown. Because, first of all, the fam¬ 
ily is an agrarian cultural institution, which is not suited 
to an urban culture. 



photographer falling into woman's lap)_i 

nority of people... 

LEARY: That's a tender sight. 

WATTS: Even if this is only realized by a 
statistical minority, nevertheless, it's IM¬ 
MENSELY powerful. 

LEARY: It affects consciousness. 

WATTS: It affects everybody. 

LEARY: I would add to practical step 
number two that more celebrations be 
set up all over... more Be-Ins... That 
April twenty-first, the solstice, be a 
nice time to try to arrange—in as .ma¬ 
ny cities as possible, because that'll 


model for the time is that breaking All the family consists in a dormitory... 

out of the smaller family organization where a wife and children are located, and 

we work in slightly larger structures, the husband, who engages in a mysterious 

like clan structures, in which people do activity in an office or a factory, in which 
work at various jobs and bring in whatever neither the wife nor the children have any 
bread they can from various jobs. part nor interest... 

But they're willing to pool it and share it and From which he brings home an abstrae- 
they learn how to work and play together. Then tion called money, 
they relate that to a larger sense of the tribe, And where there are lots of pretty 

which is also loose.. .But for the time being every- secretaries in the scene in which he 
body has to be able—from time to time—to do some actually works, 
little job. 

But, the reference is... The thing that makes it dif¬ 
ferent is.. .that you don't bring it home to a. very tight And so, they have no relation 
individual or one monogamous family unit, but you bring whatsoever to what he does, and 


BONDS OF GUILT 


be spring in the northern cities where it home to a slightly larger unit where the sharing is great- furthermore, the awful thing about 


it's hard to have a.... er. I think that's where 

And one thing I've learned in the 

last few months is that all of these MATRILINEAL DESCENT 

experiences should be out of doors LEARY: The extended family is the key. 

... What about April twenty-first? SNYDER: The extended family is, I think, where it starts. 
SNYDER: Yeah, sure... And my own particular hobby horse on this is that the extended 


the family, as it exists at the mo¬ 
ment, is that the husband and the 
wife both feel guilty about not 
bringing up their children pro¬ 
perly, and therefore they live 
for their children.. 


WATTS: And in Central Park, family leads to matrilineal descent and when we get matrilineal de- Instead of living out their 
hah! scent—then we'll have group marriage, and when we have group marri- own lives and doing their own 

SNYDER: ... and then in July age we'll have the economy licked. interesting work in which 

with the Indians in New Mex- Because with the group marriage.. .capitalism is doomed and civiliza- the children would automa- 
ico—the big gathering of the tion goes out (laughter). tically become interested 

. tribes. LEARY: Practical step number three (laughter) which I would like to see.. . as participants and.watchers 








on the side. 

As it is, they are doing ev¬ 
erything, they say. . . We live, 
we work, we earn our money 
for you darlings, and these 
poor darlings feel all these 
things thrown at them and they 
don't know what to do with it... 

And then they are sent away 
to school, shrilled off to school 
as Dylan Thomas put it... to be 
educated for everything and 
nothing... 

LEARY: By strangers. 

WATTS: By strangers... 
LEARY: Who are of dubious 
... aa.h... 

WATTS: Who would teach them 
all sorts of purely... ' 

LEARY: ...moral, intellec¬ 
tual and sexual characteristics. 
WATTS: Right (laughter). Ab¬ 
stract formulations and things 
they'll learn, and... the family 
has no reality. 

And the greatest institution 
today in the American family 
is the babysitter. Someone just 
to take the children out of our 
consciousness while we enjoy 
ourselves. 

VfA: And the DEATH sitter, 
to take the old people out of our 
consciousness. . .And even 
DEATH has been taken from 
the people. 

OUTSIDE THE GROUP 


WATTS: And the DEATH sit¬ 
ter, exactly... The courtesy of 
the mortician, yes. . .A good 
death is no longer possible, 
practically. . . 

SNYDER;! I have a four stage 
thing... Uh, American Indian 
technologies... 

WATTS: Practical now... 
SNYDER: ... meditation cen¬ 
ters, group marriage, and per¬ 
iodical gatherings of the tribes. 
LEARY: i don't agree with 
group marriage... We are a 
tribal people. You cannot have 
infidelity in a. tribe. Infidelity 
... ah, sexual freedom... 
SNYDER: Infidelity is defined 
as going outside the tribe. 
LEARY: .. .is anonymous, im¬ 
personal, anthill sexuality... 
Every woman... 

SNYDER: Now, wait a. minute. 
LEARY: Let me finish... Ev¬ 
ery woman is all women... 



If you can't find all women in 
one woman it's YOUR problem. 
Infidelity cannot be tolerated in 
a tribal, seed carrying... 
GINSBERG: Who's tolerating! 
SNYDER: Infidelity is defined 
as living outside... 

GINSBERG: We're talking infi¬ 
delity. .. What about homosexu¬ 
ality? We're... (laughter) 
SNYDER: ... is living outside 
the areas of your commitments, 
Tim. Anthropologically... and, 
actually... 

GINSBERG: What's going to 
happen to me ? (laughter) 
LEARY: You're going to have 
nine children. 

GINSBERG: What if I don't want 
them? 

LEARY: You told me you want¬ 
ed to... 

GINSBERG: Sometimes, but not 
always... 

SNYDER: No, here's what I 
was driving at... uh... Tim... 
GINSBERG: But you're a Cath¬ 
olic. .. or something... (laughter) 
SNYDER: Let me say this... 

Let me answer what he said 
there, Allen (laughter). 

LEARY: I'm an Irish Catholic 
... May I have the wine, please? 
(laughter) 

GINSBERG: What Mario Savio 
said... (chuckling) 

LEARY: What? 

GINSBERG: That you were an 
Irish Catholic... (laughter) 
LEARY: Well, the Celts, of 
course, have... a. long history 
of... 

GINSBERG: What should Mario 
Savio do ? 

SNYDER: I don't know... 

LEARY: Drop out, turn on, 
and tune. in. 

WATTS:, I think, Tim. ..you're 
being a little acceptive here. I 
do think it's possible for some 
of us to have found all women 
in one woman... 

SNYDER: I want to get back at 
something... Just let me say 
something with him.... (meaning 
Leary: Ed.) Infidelity means 
denying your commitments. 

Now, if your commitments are 
within a group marriage, then 
fidelity is being true within 
your group marriage. And in¬ 
fidelity is being untrue or dis¬ 
honest outside of that. 

Now there are some cultures 
in South America in which all 
forms of marriage are 
ted. There are group marri¬ 
ages, polyandrous marriages, 
polygamous marriages, AND 
monogamous marriages. 

WATTS: By group marriages. 

.. Just a. moment, let's get a. 
question of definition here. 

GROUP MARRIAGE 
SNYDER: Okay. A group mar¬ 
riage is where, a. number of 
people—as a group—whatever 
the number is... announce... 
a marriage is a social announce¬ 
ment of commitment... announce 
that we will be responsible for 
the children we produce and • ; 
for each other. : 


WATTS: Now, in other words, 
all males and all females in 
this group can be in mutual in¬ 
tercourse with each other ? 
SNYDER: But not outside the 
group... 

GINSBERG: You make rules to 
take care of that... You gotta, 
bring in... 

SNYDER: I'm not making rules. 
I'm just telling you what the 
anthropological precedences 
are in these things. 


that you've been deceived. 
SNYDER: What you're saying 
is endogamy... Within the tribe 
it's okay, but outside the tribe.. 
GINSBERG: Why make rules? 
Female VfA: I don't think it's 
possible, in the first place, for 
anybody's old lady to fuck J. Ed¬ 
gar Hoover. 

VfA: That may be the problem! 
WATTS: Oh, that question is 
academic (he laughs). 

SNYDER: But I wasn't... You 



It happens that in this South 
American culture that the ma¬ 
jority of the marriages are 
monogamous, but it also hap¬ 
pens that there are some poly¬ 
androus, some polygamous and 
a few group ones. 

I think that what we can allow 
is... people to combine in what¬ 
ever combinations they wish. 
LEARY: Oh, I would certainly 
agree with that. 

LOVE OVERCOMES 

VfA: Can I illustrate that? If 
my old lady wants to fuck any¬ 
body in the room here it't al¬ 
right with me, but if she fucks 
... uh... J. Edgar Hoover, I'm 
going to get very upset (laugh¬ 
ter). 

SNYDER: She should get a 
prize. She'd be doing some¬ 
thing for the nation, baby. 
LEARY: Yes, he'd be making 
love not war (laughter). 

WATTS: Well, you're simply 
saying that if she does that 
she's not at all the sort of per¬ 
son you thought she was. And 


know, like your idea of fidelity 
... Fidelity is perfectly reason¬ 
able, but fidelity simply means: 
in terms of the areas of com¬ 
mitment you've established for 
yourself. 

LEARY: That is a. beautiful... 
a beautiful model... and I think 
it requires a. little conscious¬ 
ness, which I hope will come 
quickly to the human race, Gary. 
SNYDER: I think we've had it. 
WATTS: No, but I don't... I 
don't think that you should talk 
about.. .When people, just as 
Lao-tzu said, when the great 
Tao was lost there came talk 
of duty to man and right con¬ 
duct. .. and so when the essen¬ 
tial idea of love is lost there 
comes talk of fidelity. 

That actually, the only possi¬ 
ble basis for two beings—male 
and female—to relate to each 
other is to grant each other to¬ 
tal freedom... and say, I don't 
put any bonds on you, you don't 
put any bonds on me because I 
want you, I love vou THE WAY 






ia, and bureaucratic interest 
in self-preservation,beyond 
function. 

Tyranny is perhaps the 
least invidious part of the 
indictment, human nature 


(from p. 4) impressive numbei 
of writers, poets, thinkers, 

'doctors, and scientists. 

In fact, about the only dis¬ 
sident over the years has pr¬ 
oved to be one Harry J. Ans- 
linger, a liar and a self-serving being human enough, certain- 
bureaucrat, proved as such out ly less evil by far than the full 
of his own mouth in several in- gamut of prejudice and bias 
stances including sworn congr- which has been enlisted in sup- 
essional testimony during which port of the deliberate cam- 
Mr. Anslinger contradicted paign to legislate and enact 
himself. He is presently tour- measures shocking in the de- 


ing Europe telling whoever will 
listen that LSD is a hundred 
times worse than heroin. Chet 
Helms told me this on his re¬ 
turn from England, where he 
had been telling whoever want- 
to hear that LSD was a hundred 
times better than heroin. 

David Solomon's well-or- 
ganized book encloses diverse 
talents between its covers, 
legal, scientific, and literary. 
It is through all of its pages an 
erudite and utterly convincing 
espousal of the doctrine every 
marijuana smoker has within 
him, whether articulated or 
not. For instance: it provides 
a thousand reasons why I am; 
as many justifications for my 
being; irrefutable literary and 
scientific affirmation of my 
own intuition, and sociological 
evidence of the criminal and 
racist nature of the cynical 
campaign of self-interested 
men to make marijuana illegal 
and railroad thousands upon 
thousands of American citi¬ 
zens into jails and prison— 
men and women from among 
the spiritually aware, peace¬ 
ful, and humane noncriminal 
classes., 

The last statement will 
cause some eyebrows to rise. 
To whomever would take ex¬ 
ception to it I would point out 
that it is a statement made in 
the deep belief that economic¬ 
ally deprived, racial, and eth¬ 
nic minorities are not mem¬ 
bers of a criminal class sim¬ 
ply because the laws of the 
classes that exploit them are 
in large part legislated with 
the end in mind of providing 
the means and excuse’ for what 
is a. de facto accomplishment: 
the repression of the econom¬ 
ically and politically power¬ 
less. I do not doubt this the 
least bit, nor do I expect that 
my saying it is news. If it 
were, we would scarcely, in 
1967, be on the edge of these 
several coincident movements 
that can only be termed revo¬ 
lutionary. 

In reading this book, a. pat¬ 
tern of law is revealed and a 
process of governing exposed 
as the insidious foisting of 
tyranny upon the millions 


gree of their harshness, sup¬ 
ported by misinformation, 
and cynically depending in the 
main upon a familiar style of 
yellow journalism to effect 
and accomplish what lacks any 
justification. 

These laws, hastily passed 
against the objections of all 
truly informed legal and med¬ 
ical minds, were jammed 
through Congress in 1937 upon 
the militant insistence of 
factions so obviously self-in¬ 
terested that neither they nor 
their fellows would .suggest 


port for the statements I 
make immediately above than 
the groundswell of rebellious 
and outraged citizen groups 
that is so strong in this 
country today. Few individ¬ 
uals within the groups I refer 
to seriously doubt that they are 
in reaction to iniquities and 
politico-economic injustices, 
and that great changes are 
about to take place here. 

The warmakers of America 
, do not smoke marijuana; those 
who have been called peace¬ 
niks and have accepted that 
term in large part do smoke 
marijuana. Isolation of evi¬ 
dence and proof here is not 
sharp enough to really mean 
anything to those who require 
it before making conclusions, 
but those who are more intui¬ 
tional can find meaning in the 
statement; and in another: mar¬ 
ijuana smokers do not deprive 
others of their civil rights to 
any noticeable degree, while of 
course non-smokers do. That 


that their intent was to serve 
anyone but themselves. Fed¬ 
erally instigated, these laws 
have long since fallen into 
disrepute to such an extent 
that they are only half-heart¬ 
edly enforced at the federal 
level, but are applied and en¬ 
forced ten times more fre¬ 
quently at local levels and all 
too often in the good old 
"SOUTHRON" atmosphere and 
spirit. 

Gun-toting, bullying police do 
not have any of the philosophi¬ 
cal and political inclinations 
of the people they consider 
criminals. In the vast maj¬ 
ority of cases they have out¬ 
right antipathy for these peo¬ 
ple because of widely diver¬ 
gent views and differentinter- 
ests. That enforcement 
officers largely ignore the con¬ 
stitutional guarantees which 
these people are guaranteed, 
cynically violate the Consti¬ 
tution, and employ brutal and 
even criminal methods to 

_. _ t __apprehend and convict them is 

among us who would be free by t l uito widely known, 
men without honor employing I . BUT OURS ARE THE TIMES 
the most reprehensible appa- . THAT ARE A-CHANGING 
ratus imaginable, including 

. lobbyists, journalistic hyster- There is no stronger sup- 



white Americans deprive 
non-white Americans of a great 
deal. And they also deprive 
themselves of the open mind 
and the freedom of choice that 
every marijuana, smoker either 
has before learning of the ben¬ 
efits of marijuana smoking or 
certainly acquires after. 
PROHIBITION 1919 - 1930 
The prohibition of liquor in 
the United States from 1919 to 
1933 created the modem gang¬ 
ster empire that existed in 
the United States during the 
twenties and thirties. To con¬ 
trol these new outlaws, the 
Federal Bureau of Investiga¬ 
tion was expanded to its pres¬ 
ent dimension. 

By the time the bootleggers 
and their gangs of hired guns 
had been driven underground, 
where they remain today fair¬ 
ly immune to the law, the Fed¬ 
eral Bureau of Investigation had 
entrenched itself as the power 
it presently is. J. Edgar Hoo¬ 
ver was and is the director, a 
man far beyond the usual age of 
retirement from government 
service and too powerful today 
to be removed or replaced. 

From 1930 to 1937 a steady 
stream of lurid stories about 



the effects of the "killer drug" 
marijuana, emanating from 
Washington, pervaded the coun¬ 
try and culminated in the in¬ 
famous ^Marijuana: Tax Act of 
1937. The country was being 
carefully'prepared for a new 
form of prohibition by hysteri¬ 
cal journalism, at the instiga¬ 
tion of the very wealthy and 
powerful liquor lobby that served 
the newly revived liquor indus¬ 
try. 

Headlines screamed and edi¬ 
tors fulminated, while the worst 
aspects of yellow journalism 
were used to create the atmos¬ 
phere of hysteria and abet the 
scare enactment of the 1937 law. 
Among the most blatant offen¬ 
ders was the Readers ' Digest , 
since become a powerful organ 
of opinion making, as reaction¬ 
ary then as it .is now. 

The Federal Narcotics Bur¬ 
eau, which, except for narcotic 
laws would be a. minor tax bur¬ 
eau, issued propaganda and 
was very active in bringing the 
public around to accepting this 
legislation. The time was orje 
of depression. Jobs were 
scarce, bureaucrats desperate. 

Following enactment, the 
bureau mushroomed in size and 
importance, creating sinecures 
for some, jobs for others. Its 
one-time commissioner, Harry 
J. Anslinger, found his career 
in the bureau and has proudly 
taken much of the credit for 
the publicity that indicated mar¬ 
ijuana as a. menace to youth. 

SCIENTIFIC PAPERS 


Among the reports I've stud¬ 
ied in the Scientific Papers' 





(cont. from p.18) 
section of the book are those 
of the Indian Hemp Drug Com¬ 
mission, Svfnna, 1894; Report 
of Colonel J. M. Phalen, printed 
in The Military Surgeon f July 
1943; Allentuck and Bowman, 

1942; Report of the White House 
Conference on Drugs and Drug • 
Abuse, 1962; and Report of the 
President's Advisory Commit¬ 
tee, 1963. All conclude that 
marijuana is harmless and find 
no evidence whatever to support 
the Federal Bureau of Narcotics 
and Harry Anslinger. 

The findings of the LaGuardia. 
Report were reported to the 
Mayor in 1944 by the prestigi¬ 
ous New York Academy of Med¬ 
icine. Here are the findings 
as they appear in the Academy's 
summation. These are direct¬ 
ly quoted. 

1. Smoking marijuana, does 
not lead directly to mental or 
physical deterioration. 

2. The habitual smoker knows 
when to stop, as excessive doses 
reverse the usually pleasant 
effects. 

3. Marijuana does not lead 
to addiction (in the medical 
sense), and while it is natural¬ 
ly habit-forming, its withdraw¬ 
al does not lead to the horrible 
withdrawal symptoms of the' 
opiates. 

4. No deaths have ever been 
recorded that can be ascribed 
to marijuana. 

5. Marijuana is not a direct 
causal factor in sexual or cri¬ 
minal misconduct. 

6. Juvenile delinquency is not 
caused by marijuana smoking, 
although they are sometimes 
associated. 

7. The publicity concerning - 
the catastrophic effects of mar¬ 
ijuana smoking in New York is 
unfounded. 

8. It is more of a. nuisance 
than a. menace. 

The crusade against mari¬ 
juana has been so zealous that 
by and large public opinion sub¬ 
scribes to the official position 
that'it is malign, causing men¬ 
tal debility, physical deteriora¬ 
tion, sexual degeneracy, moral 
decay and, in general, crimi¬ 
nal behavior justifying the pas¬ 
sage of harsh and repressive 
laws against it. And so I have 
gone in search of the malign, 
spending many hours poring 
over the findings of the several 
studies that David Solomon in¬ 
cludes in his book under the 
heading of scientific papers. 

I have not considered the time 
a waste because I have failed to 
find the malign. 

The following observations . 
are the nearest to an indict¬ 
ment of marijuana tha't I could 


find: 

A generalataxiais apparently 
limited to the symptomatic. 

An increased pulse rate, blood 
pressure, and blood sugar 
level are likewise limited to 
symp + omatic . Theincreased 


frequency of urination does not 
increase the quantity of urine 
passed. 

The user of marijuana, has 
mixed feelings of euphoria and 
apprehension as well as feel¬ 
ings of relaxation and dis in¬ 
hibition. There is an increase 
in self-awareness and a reduc¬ 
tion of critical faculty result¬ 
ing in a more favorable attitude 
toward the self and a capacity 
to freely verbalize. 

The effect of marijuana, is to 
make the user less aggressive; 
the auditory acuity is unaffect¬ 
ed and musical ability unim¬ 
proved. A noticeable degree 
of intellectual impairment is 
manifest as a loss of both 
speed and accuracy of intellec¬ 
tual function. No mental de¬ 
terioration is discernible and 
indications are that it does not 
occur. 


ported no deleterious effects 
attendant on the continued use 
of marijuana.. The’r presti¬ 
gious study, well-received in 
the scientific community, 
caused a stir in the press when 
it was published in 1943. 

In 1942, Dr. Alfred R. Lin- 
desmith won the respect of the 
intellectual community for his 
incisive criticism'of the Fed¬ 
eral Narcotic" Bureau. He is 
regarded today as one of the 
most perceptive and enlighten¬ 
ed experts on the sociological 
use of drugs. 

The LaGuardia study was 
conducted by the New York 
Academy of Medicine, whose 
prestige in medical circles is 
so considerable as to place it 
above the criticism of the AMA. 
The Mayor's Committee, which 
made the study and drew up the 
report, was composed of fif- 


and his activities into proper 
perspective, I include the fol¬ 
lowing piece of statistical in¬ 
formation: 

In 19.36, sixty percent of all 
the crimes committed in the 
City of New Orleans were at¬ 
tributed to marijuana. This 
was at the height of the mari¬ 
juana. hysteria that was so much 
of a thing in the thirties. Today 
no one seriously considers 
marijuana a factor in crime. 

In a letter published in the 
Journal of the American Medi¬ 
cal Association of January 16, 
1943, he cited numerous ref¬ 
erences in support of his con¬ 
tention that the use of mari¬ 
juana. led to insanity. The AMA 
has long been an Anslinger ally 
and between them they have 
mounted attacks on every re¬ 
port on narcotics that fails to 
agree with Anslinger's untena- 



HARRY ANSLINGER 

Following publication of the 
findings of the LaGuardia Re¬ 
port, the American Medical 
Association, the Federal Nar¬ 
cotics Bureau, and Harry An¬ 
slinger all attacked the inves¬ 
tigators and denounced their 
findings. Anslinger's remarks 
were couched in terms one 
would hardly expect to find in 
a. medical journal. 

This was in 1944. Similar 
conclusions had been arrived 
at by Allentuck and Bowman 
the previous year and had been 
as bitterly assailed from the 
same quarters. There were 
rumors at the time that the 
report would be suppressed, 
and the Reader's Digest pas¬ 
sionately deplored its publica¬ 
tion. Allentuck and Bowman 
concluded that there was no 
evidence to connect marijuana 
with opiates and no evidence 
that prolonged use of marijua¬ 
na, led to physical, mental, or 
moral degeneration. They re¬ 


: teen M. D. 's and two Ph. D’s. 

Their labors are regarded 
as the most thorough and me¬ 
ticulous scientific study ever 
made on marijuana, and the 
factual findings of the report 
are the most impressive in the 
whole body of scientific litera¬ 
ture on marijuana—a. literature 
going back thousands of years. 

Others have labored in behalf 
of truth in this matter and have 
invariably earned recognition 
of at least one kind: denuncia¬ 
tion by Federal Narcotics Bur¬ 
eau spokesmen, the American 
Medical Association, through 
its Journal, and Harry Anslin¬ 
ger. 

One of the doctors on Mayor 
LaGuardia's Committee inci¬ 
sively observed that hemp has 
been cultivated in America 
since the seventeenth century, 
and has only become a problem 
associated with a great deal of 
publicity in the last ten years. 
The remark was made in 1944. 

In an attempt to put Anslinger 


In I960 and 1961, Anslinger 
extended his operations and 
was very active in bringing 
pressure to bear on the Amer¬ 
ican Delegation to the United 
Nations and on members of the 
International committees con¬ 
cerned with narcotics to work 
in behalf of anti-marijuana le¬ 
gislation. 

As a. result, most member 
nations, notably the Arab na¬ 
tions and some from Africa, 
that were recipients of Amer¬ 
ican economic and military 
aid, adopted the legislation he 
recommended. 

One notable exception was 
India., whose leaders turned a 
deaf ear on Anslinger. Most 
likely this was because of the 
extensive use of marijuana, in 
the Ayurvedic, Unani, and 
Tibbi systems of indigenous 
medicine that is practiced on 
the Indian-Pakistani sub-con¬ 
tinent. End Part i 

cont. on p. 20 








cont. from p. 19 

THE TWO COMMANDMENTS 

In the Politics, Ethics and 
Meaning of Marijuana , Dr. Lea¬ 
ry introduces two command¬ 
ments for the Molecular Age, 
based on his understanding that 
Marijuana and LSD alter con¬ 
sciousness. The statements: 

I. THOU SHALT' NOT AL¬ 
TER THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF 
THY FELLOW MAN 

II. THOU SHALT NOT PRE¬ 
VENT THY FELLOW MAN 


FROM ALTERING HIS OWN 
CONSCIOUSNESS 
He predicates the future of 
the species on our understand¬ 
ing and obeying these two natu¬ 
ral laws. A conservative esti¬ 
mate in 1951 set 200 million as 
the number of marijuana smo¬ 
kers world wide, more people 
than can be included in the com¬ 
bined Jewish and Protestant 
religons and exceeding in num¬ 
ber the population of the United 
States. Ten million of these 
people live in the United States, 
persecuted as an outlaw group, 


Spring has sprung, day ba¬ 
lancing night... new mountains 
on the horizon, seen from the 
'see ya., dad! ciudad'.. .the 
basic source is SPIRIT & natu¬ 
ral country... changes: 

r ° und «W4 * 

& % O 

"It all figures in a new 
litany probably pastoral 
after the cries of the birds 
has stopped" 

—Ferlinghetti 

NOTES ON ORGANIC 
GARDENING by Elsa Gidlow 
All growing begins with the 
soil. Organic gardening (nat¬ 
ural growing) begins with the 
health of the soil, and health 
of the soil begins with life; 
with organic matter; with in¬ 
finitesimal bacteria.; with 
worms areating the soil and 
contributing their castings. 

If you have an apron of land, 
a lot, a plot, an acre or a 
farm—look first to the soil. 

You may be surprised when 
you start to dig that there is 
little of it. Perhaps .it is just 
clay. It may be tired, ruined 
by poor cultivation methods, 
overstimulated by chemical 
fertilization to the point of ex¬ 
haustion and the hard packing 
that results. ^7 0 


Whatever sort of soil it may 
be, the first step before you 
even begin to think of seeds 
and their power is to provide 
them with the sources of that 
power. 

The basic source is organic 
matter. This is provided by 
enriching the original earth 
you start with, adding com¬ 
posted materials—any sort of 
organic matter from weeds, 
leaves, kitchen wastes, what- 
have-you. Compost can be 
made in as short a time as 14 
days if you follow modern 
methods. (See books and oth¬ 
er materials by J. I. Rodale, 

33 E. Minor St., Emmaus, 

Pa. 18049) 

Add aged or composted ani¬ 
mal manures, blood meal, 
bone meal, ground rock if you 
can get it, dolomite, seaweed. 

Seaweed is magical.. .those 
long greeny-brown snaky 
tubes you see on the beaches 
after a. storm. It's full of io¬ 
dine and other minerals. I've 
heard that in Golden Gate Park 
they have processed sewage 
sludge for sale but I have not 
been able to track it down so 
far. 

Chemical fertilizers do not 
build soil; they exhaust it. 
Fertilization of plants is best 
done with liquid fertilizers: 
"tea." from animal wastes 
made by soaking the manure in 
a barrel or tub; fish emulsion, 
commercially available (I use 
Atlas), mixed into the water 
and fed periodically during the 
growing season. The plant 
roots must be fed and the soil 


enduring conditions inflicted 
upon them by a middle class 
bureaucracy addicted to alcohol. 

These commandments say in 
a political and ethical sense 
that you may not drug others 
but you have to do it to your¬ 
self. Psychedelic substances 
require models or maps that 
make possible the two comm¬ 
andments. You are master of 
your own nervous system and 
lord of your own consciousness. 
The psychedelic person, natu¬ 
rally passive, requires privacy 
, for sensual, spiritual, internal 

continuously built up as its 
nourishment is being used, 
transferred to the lettuce, the 
carrots, the strawberries, the 
squash or corn that in turn 
transfer to us the living food— 
not dead, stored, frozen, 
canned, irradiated packages of 
unnourishment. 

When you know you have 
made a start with good soil, 
look to the light, the sunshine, 
the freedom from competition 
by hungry tree roots or shrub¬ 
bery that leech away water 
and nutrients. 

Vegetables should be at 
least thirty feet from the reach 
of the roots of any surrounding 
trees. Roots usually are said 
to extend as far out as the 
spread of a tree's branches. 
Eucalyptus trees send roots 
considerably further afield. 

Vegetables require at 
least six continuous hours of 
exposure to sunlight in most 
cases. In very hot weather 
lettuce can take some shad¬ 
ing—preferably from taller 
plants. So can some other 
delicate greens. The length 
of the hours of light deter¬ 
mines the speed of growth, 


and introspective experiences, 
the valued and essential requi- 
- sites of systems balancing har¬ 
monies of view in loving de¬ 
tachment from material goals. 

Man shall not act as god to 
others. Man shall love God and 
his fellow man. Alter the con¬ 
sciousness. How? Control of 
consciousness? Who? The 
CIA? The self! 

Recently a scandal occurred 
when the United States Army 
tested LSD on recruits and 
troops: LSD produces ectasy. 
LSD lets you see through the 
cont. on p. 21 

These are just a few hints. 
There is a lifetime of learning 
ahead for any gardener or 
farmer, and it's all joyous. 

One of the greatest thrills is. 
MAKING soil from garbage and 
wastes: composting. Another 
is seeing the first shoots. 

No one who gardens ever 
ceases to marvel and feel a 
physical sensation of wonder 
and delight on going out some 
early morning and finding tiny 
heads of pale green pushing 
up the broken earth where 
rows of seed were planted 
weeks before, or, in the case 
of eager seeds like radishes 
or cress, four or five days 
before. We are returned to 
mystery and the power of 
cooperating with life—rather 
than, as so often now, working 
against it. Never forget, 
though, that it takes very ha.ro 
work, real sweat. 

Who feels called to the war 
against processed nonfood for 
processed nonpeople, and to 
the creative work of produc¬ 
tion for health and sanity 
without which there is no 
dance or song, music or joy? 




cont. from p. 20 
game veil. LSD. RNA. Mar¬ 


ijuana. Lysergic Acid. Ami¬ 
no Acid. Molecular learning 
communicated at the cellular 
level must be studied from 
within. Frightened? Oh Beat¬ 
nik Amphibia, where do you get 
your courage ? It is. not taught 
in school. 

Evocations of your dedication 
to the nature of the ethic: ex¬ 
pose oneself to new forms of 
energy and find faith in molec¬ 
ular energy released by psy¬ 
chedelic molecules. Not blind 
faith, but faith in the harmony 
and wisdom of nature, some¬ 
thing easy to prove with method 
and map. 

Six levels of neural and cel¬ 
lular consciousness can be dis-? 
cerned: the Minimal, Symbolic, 
External, and Introspective, 
the Cellular and Pre-Cellular 
(atomic). The symbolic is 
normal. The external relates 
psychedelically to mandala, 
mantra , tantra and to mari- 
juana. J / 


Contact with chakras propels 
consciousness on kaleidoscopic 
voyages along strands of nucleic 
acid molecules. Cellular con¬ 
sciousness touches timeless 
wisdom. Transcendental con¬ 
sciousness —pure energy—the 
light within —the void.. 

And, past the power of mar¬ 
ijuana to evoke are evocations 
of the cellular and pre-cellular 
levels where symbols become 
poetic and mystical. Vision is 
shut off by alcohol and narcotic 
drugs. Marijuana, the weakest 
of the psychedelic drugs and 
a secret aphrodisiac, is an ex¬ 
panding lens. LSD is an elec¬ 
tron microscope for the ethereal. 

The sensitive smoke mari¬ 
juana, raise their pulse rates 
a little, diminish the intelli¬ 
gence some, and alter the con¬ 
sciousness. Using corrective 
lenses of the expanding type, 
they raise body levels of sens¬ 
ory awareness both externally 
and internally. 


WILLIAM BURROUGHS 

Perhaps the world's leading 
authority on drug use and 
abuse, and certainly the Amer¬ 
ican novelist who most surely 
possesses genius, William 
Burroughs describes the word 
"drug" as a generic term for 
any chemical agent. Exploit¬ 
ing the broadest category that 
can be implied by such terms, 
the Federal Narcotics Bureau 
has bracketed substances of 
opposite physiological effect, 
calling them all narcotic 
drugs. But younger by far 
than ever you are, the new 
young that grace the scene use, 
as only they can, terms per¬ 
haps more pregnant and, in 
this case, surely so, saying 
soft drugs, hard drugs, and 
understanding themselves. 
Sensible terms separate the 
sensible meaning of things 
into different orders impossi¬ 
ble to bracket. Talking little, 
hearing much, open minded, 
the young are the informed and 
beatific initiates of the day. 

Burroughs' Points of Distin ¬ 
ction Between Sedatives and 
Consciousness-Expanding 

Drugs inserts nuances of 
meaning essential to a subject 
intuitively grasped by the 
young and suggests that the 
word "consciousness-expand¬ 
ing" be used instead of "hallu¬ 
cinogen. " (Actual hallucino¬ 
gens are rare.) Mescaline, 
LSD, Cannabis, phenomenally 
increase awareness, intensify 
meanings, and many of the 
insights resulting from their 
use are permanent. One ex¬ 
posure to a powerful consci¬ 
ousness-expanding drug quite 
often results in a permanent 
increase in the range of ex¬ 
perience. 

William Burroughs, serving 
the race of man with truth 
and objectivity, suggests an 
objective test whereby the ef¬ 
fect of such a. drug administ¬ 
ered in requisite dosage and 
accompanied by an array of 
stimuli can be compared with 
the effects observed when a 
person addicted to morphine 
is given morphine accompan¬ 
ied by the same array of stim¬ 
uli. 

Such tests would seem to 
illustrate Burroughs' important 
distinction between the seda¬ 
tive and the consciousness-ex¬ 
panding drugs. An alcoholic 
so tested and observed would 
add insight into the essential 
difference in the two kinds of 
drugs. Burroughs has inci¬ 
sively pointed up that differ- 

The use of consciousness¬ 
expanding drugs now foretells 
hallucinogen experience with¬ 
out using the trigger of chem¬ 
ical agents. For example, 
music has been used success¬ 
fully as an anesthetic for ex¬ 


tracting teeth. Mental colors 
are heard, visual sounds seen, 
and mescaline subliminally 
administered in the presence of 
a flicker light (rhythmic flash¬ 
ing light) is step one in a two- 
step process whereby the 
flicker light alone, provides a 
non-chemical method of ex¬ 
panding consciousness and in¬ 
creasing awareness. Mari¬ 
juana is the safest hallucinogen 
and is unquestionable useful to 
the artist. 

Opiates, on the contrary, are 
a. proven hindrance to the art¬ 
ist. Marijuana, is a psychic 
god. Hallucinogens are kpys 
to creative process. Study of 
these keys opens non-chemical 
methods of expanding con¬ 
sciousness of all six of the 
levels mentioned. 

cont. on p. 22 






















Today as we seek for ways to escape involvement with 
illusionary hings we stop in our flight to examine the con¬ 
ditions which afflict us and see that we are engaged with 
our nominal protectors in the most serious of differences 
over the use and possession of a weed that flourishes 
;everywhere and which we naturally relate to our own ner¬ 
vous systems and we begin to question whether the issue 
can be a weed or the nervous system or whether it is not 
anything less than the repressive nature we have permitted 
to develop in our own breasts while we have heard others 
being beaten in the cause of peace. 

And this has poisoned us for it is peace that is being 
beaten while war is waged on a weed at home that is con¬ 
sidered holy among men whom we permit to starve while 
we war on their neighbors. We are per¬ 
mitted insight into the nature of our 
motivations, insight that can be 
assayed on levels and in terms 
free of emotional aspects while 
serving as the control point 
for parallel relationships 
that tell us what it is, we 


to die and lives again, for it may not be so. 

Someone once told me that the seed god Osiris gave 
flour, the spirit of vegetation, to man, and after Isis 
taught men to bake bread Osiris forbade them meat, and 
that it had really taken place this way a man who was 
brave discovered seeds and water which his wife made in¬ 
to bread, and for which men honored him, and that when 
he died men collected stones and made a shrine, deifying 
him instead of eating himJbecause of what he had been 
alive that remained as precious dead. 

In India all is Color } odor, music, life bizarre and 
beautiful is holy and does not act as if it were not. A 
crowded holiness turned from the materialism of either 
communistic or capitalistic dogmas, preferring its own 
essential reasons and 
tootothers, ptrceiv- 
final presence in ul- 
that by ending 
life meaning. It is per- 
better to not kill co¬ 
bras or eat cows, 


ao ana wnat aegree oi piinTfl/KATAltf 

fault we can discern and PHOTO/KAGAN 

call human and at the same time reveal the 
of our thought that are in no way anywhere in 
day of such nature as to be referred to by anyone as ac¬ 
ceptable to the mind in recoil from insights that writhe, 
twisting the acceptable awry, refusing to relate terms im¬ 
possible to equate with those acceptable to impossible minds 
minds. Yes, I am afraid that this issue goes that deep. 

INDIA AND AMERICA 

If it were possible to examine a scene in India and then 
America and reflect on whether the American readiness to 
bomb Asians is made possible by their consumption of al¬ 
cohol, and necessitated by the industrial production and 
domestic consumption of oil, steel, and armaments. For 
in India they do not drink as we do, preferring to smoke as 
I do the harvested produce of the field, giving cobras sau¬ 
cers of milk and drinking at the tooth of death. For they 
have learned that starvation is just another word for dying, 
and they prefer it to the extreme nullity of war. There can 
be no meaning, until it is sought for itself, and not hunted as 
a thing to be found, surviving everything until it is caught 
and killed, irrelevant to one who pauses between killings 


feeding beggars with emp¬ 
ty hands, than it is to let 

automobiles carry the burden of our living, our loving, 
our dying acts. 

India is a warm moist place very like a womb and used 
much as one even as the soil of people is the soil of 
earth is one and the same soil is the Only word that is the 
true word of man uttering the name of god. There, culti¬ 
vated for their powers, are these weeds that flourish 
everywhere and alleviate hunger, loneliness, pain, and 
fear by banishing all desire with smoke and love of god. 

LOVE 

In the west, love is an enigma man seeks to control by 
contraceptives breeding death where death is believed in, 
and mocking utterances die on the lips of men. The wine 
and the wafer are the blood and meat of the slain. The 
flesh deified saves the self certainly. 

Seeking in speech for things that by saying speak well of 
words and what they hold has led me to contrast as best I 
mav the little I know of Indian life with the American 
as I know it. 

Since the advent here in the psychedelic community of , 
emerging preferences for Asian art and thought, the . - 
cont. on p. 39 X-X- 







































the parasympathetic I 
nerve tissues. 

The known side effect , 
brought on by the ingestioM 
of arterenol is that it canp 
be harmful to persons under treatment! 
for low blood pressure and low puls^^^ 


Teo-nanaeatl is the Aztee- 
word for the magic mushroom, 

I translated it means "God's 
.flesh", and it was the Aztec's 
means of attaining communion 
with his God. 

Other Indians, other places, knew 
and used different sacraments: 
peyote, cannabis, datura, morning 

/ glory seeds, mescal beans, bananas, - . 

etc.. .ad infinitum. They were SURROUN- DDT) sprayed on during preharvesIT- 
DED by natural sources of the hallucinogens, ing will remain and cause toxic ef- » 
and so are we, even more so. fects. However, if you plan to us%*^" 

A study; of traditional literature shows the whole peel, wash the outside 

that most Indian cultures had respect for surface. * *1; 

their powerful sacraments and they knew how One method for turning on: * 
to use them so that the risk of causing ex- freeze the peels, break and re- • 

tensive damage to the human body was kept duce to a. pulp in a blender, put in 

at a minimum. WE also must learn how to the oven (low heat, 200 degrees) un¬ 
use these divine gifts so that we do not des¬ 
troy or alter the human form. 

The legions of tumed-on people on this 
J earth know that there are many psychedelic 
agents, and there is some knowledge about the 
side effects of the more widely used ones. But we know al¬ 
most nothing about the effects of the recently discovered/ 
rediscovered means of turning o». 

That's where the energies behind this column will be 
directed: to discuss the virtues/liabilities of these 
forms, and to introduce to you our discoveries. If you 
have any comments or questions please direct them to 
the Oracle. 


If you go on the banana trip you 1 
might have the antidote atropine 
sulfate available. There is 
very little, danger that an appreci¬ 
able amount of the insecticide (2% 


til it's dry enough to smoke. *•' 

Another method: scrape the whitish 
substance from the inside of the peels and 
dry in oven. 

°r 


np 




But that balance factor 
is not perfect; in any par¬ 
ticular A. muscaria the 
balance between musca¬ 
rine and atropine may 
be off and the toxic 


sure and pulse rate 
it can cause hyper¬ 
sensitivity because of 
l increased arousal / 

) and activity in jfa 


effect of muscarine 
may not be blocked. , 
So to avoid disas¬ 
trous conse- 
cont. on p. 


Beautiful Peace People, the Mexican 
magic mushroom has sisters that are be¬ 
ing rediscovered and they are turning 1 
people on. 

Two of them are found locally (Bay 
area) as well as in other parts of the 
country: the Amanita, muscaria. and 
the Amanita pantherina, both of which 
contain the hallucinogenic agent mus- ^ 
The banana is more than a source of food . carine. 

The peel contains arterenol, a. sympatho- The A. muscaria also contains i 
mimetic agent that is also found in atropine, commonly known as bella- 
the human body, in the ad- donna, which when acting alone is 
renal medulla,, where an hallucinogenic agent, but when ' 
it affects a balance con- it's ingested with muscarine, as 
trol factor on the cen- happens when the A. muscaria is 
tral nervous system eaten, it is an antidote. Atropine 
and ultimately the counteracts the toxic effects of the^ 
heart. muscarine: profuse perspiration, j, 

Arterenol is pro- vomiting, severe diarrhea, re- l 
duced synthetically 'spiratory paralysis, and some- / 
'or use as a relief times death, 
of hypertension: 
it's a. cardiac 
stimulant. Used 
_ , by a person with 

1 {>} / ( rr normal and/or 

healthy blood pres- 


I 








m && £ W & S M fr 

SOKU ZE KU KU SOKU ZE SHIKI JU SO GYO 

is the emptiness. Emptiness is the form. Sensation, thought, acti 


mm £ 


SHA Rl SHI ZE SHO HO KU SO FU SHO FU METSU FU KU FU JO 

Sariputra, this everything original character; not born, not annihilated not tainted, not pure, * 

* a * if s « 

FU ' ZO FU GEN ZE KO KU CHU MU SHIKI MU JU SO GYO 

(does) not increase, (does) not decrease. Therefore in emptiness no form, no sensation, thought, active substance, 

m * 

IKI SHO KO Ml SOKU HO MU GEN 


# MM ft MM 

MU MU MYO YAKU MU MU MYO 

no ignorance, also no ignorance 


SHIKI 

MU GEN Nl Bl ZETS SHIN Nl 

consciousness. No eye, ea 

ir, nose, tongue, body, 

, mind; 


ft M 



KAI 

NAI SHI 

MU 1 SHIKI 

KAI 

world of 

eyes until we come I 

to also no world of 

consciou 

m 

7b m 


^ i 

JIN 

NAI SHI 

MU RO SHI 

YAKU 

annihilation, until we come to 

no old age, death, 

also 

m 

a 

^ # i 


in M 

w ... .... MU KU SHU 

old age, death, annhilation of no suffering, cause of suffering, 


ft «56 5 E 


METSU DO MU CHI YAKU MU TOKU I MU SHO TOK KO 60 DAI SAT TA E 

nirvana, path; no wisdom, also no attainment because of no attainment. Bodhisattva depends 01 








o 



wl # mmmztit & m % mm 

HAN NYA HA RA MIT TA KO SHIN MU KE GE MU KE GE KO MU U KU FU ON Rl 

prajna paramita because mind no obstacle. Because of no obstacle no exist fear; go beyond 

-so® nww.% % m m nit m u, m « 

I SSAI TEN DO MU SO KU GYO NE HAN SAN ZE SHO BUTSU E HAN 

all (topsy-turvey views) attain Nirvana. Past, present and future every Buddha depend on prajna 

m mmmm # h« ##=■ ® ~ mm 

NYA HA RA MIT TA KO TOKU A NOKU TA RA SAN MYAKU SAN BO DAI 

paramita 'therefore attain supreme, perfect, enlightenment. 

®c » m w « 

KO CHI HAN NYA HA RA MIT TA ZE DAI JIN SHU ZE DAI MYO SHU 

Therefore I know Prajna paramita (is) the great holy mantram, the great untainted mantram, 

&m±n m » -wm m m 

ZE MU JO SHU ZE MU TO DO SHU NO JO IS SAI KU SHIN JITSU FU KO 

the supreme mantram, the incomparable mantram. Is capable of assuaging all suffering. True not false. 

sc m ® # i * 0. 

KO SETSU HAN NYA HA RA MIT TA SHU SOKU SETSU SHU WATSU 

Therefore he proclaimed Prajna paramita mantram and proclaimed mantram says 

m m m m mmmm mm\$m m m a 

GYA TE GYA TE HA RA GYA TE HA RA SO GYA TE BO DHI SO WA KA 

gone, gone, to ther other shore gone, reach (go) enlightenment accomplish. 

& m 

HAN NYA SHIN GYO 


NEGA WA KU WA KO NO KU DO KU O MOTTE A MA NE KU ISSAI Nl OYO 

What we pray , this merit with universally all existence Pervade, 

ISL iU a S> BS -ff/u 3 i 

BO SHI WARE RA TO SHU JO TO Ml NA TO MO Nl BUTSUDO O JYO ZEN KO TO 

we and sentient being all with Buddhism achieve 


4* 

Q (What I pray is that this merit pervade universally and we Buddhists and all sentient beings achieve 

this Buddhism.) 


+ * sis 


ft # 


Jl HO SAN SHI I SHI HU SHI SON 

Ten directions past, present and future all Buddhas The world honoured 01 


*Hi 




MO KO HO JA HO RO Ml 

great Prajna - paramita. 


























YOU ARE! And I want you to 
be that... (from p-17) 

The minute you start making 
contracts and bonds and signing 
on the dotted line, you are 
WRECKING the whole relation¬ 
ship. . 

And you just have to trust to 
the fact that human beings should 
be legally allowed to trust each 
’ other, and to enter into a fell¬ 
owship that does not involve a 
contractual arrangement. 
LEARY: I think we all agree 
with that. 

WATTS: You know, because if 
you don't do that yOU'LL KILL 
IT! 

SNYDER: In primitive cultures 
marriage is not a contractual 
arrangement; it's a public an¬ 
nouncement. 

WATTS: YES! 

SNTDER: ft's a. relationship 
which is made public. 

.LEARY: What was your fourth 
:point, Gary? 

SNYDER: Occasional gatherings 
of the tribe... tribes! That 
wasn't a point... it was an ac¬ 
tivity. .. 

Say rather than group marri¬ 
age. ..extended families. Ex¬ 
tended cooperation structures, 
in other words. American 
tIndian technologies, medita¬ 
tion centers, extended coopera¬ 
tive clan type... or extended 
family type structures with much 
more permissiveness! in the na¬ 
ture of the family structure than 
is permitted, say, In Judaeo- 
Christian tradition, and gather¬ 
ings of the larger tribes per- 



VfA: Gary, in a tribal situation, 
isn't it true that the tribe has a 
fantastic distrust of other tribes, 
and there is a whole set of magic 
rituals setj up to protect itself 
from other tribes ? 

SNYDER: Not necessarily... 
No... 

LEARY: I think that when Gary 
talks about tribes, he's not talk¬ 
ing about... just the past.. .what 
we can learn from the past;.. I 
think that we can learn from the 
history of tribal relationships 
that there has been this neigh¬ 
borly antagonism.. .this terri¬ 
torial—|distrust.. 

GINSBERG: The Jiva.ros... 
SNYDER: What a beautiful trip,' 
VfA: We'll have a common ene¬ 
my—for some time, which will 
make that... 

GINSBERG: An enemy? Wait 
\a minute... 


VfA: A common enemy, in that, 
there will be people trying to 
destroy this concept taking place 
. in actuality... 

LEARY: All the German tribes 
got together to protect against 
the Romans. 

Which will lead to practical 
.step number five... I think that 
some thought should be given— 

1 to organizing a legal protection— 
for our co-religionists. 

Now we want to avoid any sort 
of leadership, or tight organiza¬ 
tion, but there must be some wa.j 
way to work out models in tribal 
alliance... to defend ourselves 
—lovingly, against the legions 
of Caesar. 

The model that we worked out, 
which our lawyers tell us, looks 
pretty good... is—that the tribe 
gets together and puts down on 
paper, it's tribal code, it's 
sacraments, it's rituals, it's 
center; and it states very clear¬ 
ly that it is going to worship— 
this way, in this place. 

Specifically what that means 
is that any group of people car 
get together and put down on 
paper—how they worship. 

Which, by the way, is a good 
exercise in seeing how centered 
the group is. Because it makes 
psychedelic sense as well as 
legal sense. And, then... The 
group is protected legally to 
worship... 

I would like some practical 
consideration given to how we 
can provide—legal protection. 
The model that we've worked 
out—of a group getting together 
and filing papers., for what is 
essentially a license... 
GINSBERG: How has that 
worked out so far, Martin Gar- 
vus, in New York, filed papers 
as an injunction against the FDA. 
LEARY: We're waiting until I 
get back. 

\A G OO D COURT CASE 
SNYDER: I don't know how 
this would work, but if one good 
court case, or a freedom of re¬ 
ligion issue was won in the Su¬ 
preme Court—that would solve 
the problem down the line just 
about, wouldn't it? 

LEARY: No, it doesn't! . 
cause we have to take into ac¬ 
count, Caesar's anxiety about 
what we're doing. It's got to 
be done on a tribe by tribe ba¬ 
sis. 

That is, your tribe has got to 
file... Allen's tribe will help 
your tribe. You'll lose in Cal¬ 
ifornia., perhaps, because the 
lower court judge was unsym 
pathetic; but you'll win in New 
York State. 

SNYDER: This issue will be 
won in the courts, though? 
LEARY: Yes, we'll attempt to 
set up—an overall church hier¬ 
archy, but simply that... 
WATTS: To put this down spec¬ 
ifically, you are saying that’ 
small clubs of people, who are 
like minded, should incorporate 
■ themselves as non-profit relig¬ 



ious organizations and should 
state their constitution, their 
by-laws, their liturgy. 


WATTS: Well, let's go back 
and take a Certain historical pers¬ 
pective on this once again. For 
example, a parallel problem a- 
rises with regard to conscien¬ 
tious objection. 

There are a lot of conscien¬ 
tious objectors who don't belong 
to any form of religion. They're 
not to say, Quakers or Jehovah's 
Witnesses, and their objections 
are based on philosophical 
grounds. 

Well, AT LAST, the govern¬ 
ment has been moved to give 
fair consideration to these cases 

Now, on the same principle, 
freedom of religion does not in¬ 
volve that you belong to a speci¬ 
fic organization or that you have 
belonged to this religion for so 
long. 

After all, supposing St. Paul 


LEARY:’ In every state, you car had been challenged on the Da- 
get a very small amount of mon- fWleroad. „How^long have 
ey, a corporation form. If you mjjt “ 
want to start a bowling alley, 
with three of your friends, it's 
all down there. 


you belonged to the Christian 
church ? 

LEARY: But practically, Alan, 
it does... 


You just fill out the places, in WATTS: Now, but this has to 
this mimeographed form, and be ar g ue< L • • 


file it... It doesn't cost any 
money to file it, and you've got 
a legally incorporated religion. 
It's so simple to do. 

WATTS: Yes, but there needs 
to be spelled out the absolutely 
practical A-B-C legal terms in 
which this can be done. 

INCORPORATED RELIGION 
LEARY; Well, I suggest that 
the next issue of the ORACLE 
carry a half page, or a full 
page—manual on "How to form 
your own religion. " 

VfA: One of the steps there is 
that... in incorporating—there 
should be nothing in the rules 


LEARY:... Because this case 
that was argued in Los Angeles 
last week was lost, because the 
fellow was busted and then he 
had to prove afterwards. 

If he had simply filed a paper 
ahead of time, before he was 
busted, the strength of his legal 
argument would have been much 
stronger. 

WATTS: Yes , but the thing 

is still unconstitutional, because 
the constitution does NOT say... 
that to exercise freedom of re¬ 
ligion, you must have belonged 
to a group of X number of peo¬ 
ple for such and such a time in 
order to prove your sincerity... 


of the corporation that is illegal LEARY: But practically, the 
-in the state of California. That to " 

means that if the group is going 
to use LSD or marijuana—it 
could not incorporate. 

LEARY: ... you don't worry 
about that. If five hundred 
groups form in California—and, 
of course, it's moot. 

It's unsettled as to whether 


illegal or not, and immediately, 
there's your first case. If they 


WATTS: It's your conscience. 
GINSBERG: This case has to 
go on appeal still... 

LEARY: Oh, I... I bless it and 
I hope that it does go on appeal. 

THE ANARCHIST’S CREDO 
SNYDER: I have a very strong 
feeling about a lot of what Alan 


say it's illegal, then you say, 
•what's illegal? Holy marijuana 
—that's been in use for five 
thousand years ? There's your 
first case. 

instead of being paranoid, and 
waiting for the police to bust 
you bn-Haight-Ashbury, let' 


political type of organization, 
namely the anarchists', • . blessed 
be their memory... 

Good old anarchists practiced 
one thing, and that was they 
wouldn't use the courts. 

And a conscientious anarchist, 
if robbed, and able to identify 
his assailant, would not turn 


take a loving-game move to clar- “ 1S assai an L ™ oul “ not , turn . 
ify the situation, which REALLY ! ^sassa^nt mt ° the pollce be ‘ . 
disturbs the police and it disturbs ' __ , ,, . „ 

•the San Francisco papers and it “*** ^ 1 ? 

disturbs the San Francisco leg- SNYDER: Because, he saxd, if 
islature. Let's take this first l ! m S° m S to beaa ^rchist and. 

initiatory step towards them. den y that * aeed tbe ^ ate ^ al " 
so going to deny that I need to go 
SNYDER: Well, the ACLU, to the state for protection. 
Marshall Krause and Dick Wert- And I feel very much the same 
heimer, are trying to figure how way about... 
to set up a GOOD grass case, LEARY: I think that's romantic, 
right now. And move it through Gary, I see a situation... 
as a test case. SNYDER: I'm not going to go to 

a lawyer and ask him to incor^ 
coot. p. 30 


UNORGANIZED OBJECTORS 


or 29 


porate me, you know... 
GINSBERG: Did you go to a law¬ 
yer to get married or divorced 
or anything? 

SNYDER: Yeah, but I mean in 
terms of a religion. 

G.NSBERG: Yeah, because you 
can prove you're a big, formal 
buddhist. 

SNYDER: I can't prove it, 
actually, no. I really wouldn't 
feel like doing that, and I don't 
think the people at the Mahalila 
feel like doing that. 

LEARY: We're not telling any¬ 
one what to do. We're suggest¬ 
ing a way of dealing with this 
mutant revolutionary problem. 

I see us as in a dark ages. 

We're little tribes getting 
together; there's feudal lords 
and barons and kings and dukes 
and so forth. And they own the 
land because they've got steel 
and we're under bayonet point. 

SNYDER: That's too paranoid. 
We're on the verge of winning, 
really. 

LEARY: Oh, no doubt about 
that. 

MONEY BEGETS? 

WATTS: Yes, because the 
people who are wielding the 
bayonets have no satisfactory 
life and they know... 

You know, it's like produc¬ 
ing all sorts of goods that are 
increasingly inferior, and you 
make lots of money, and then 
you've made the money, and 
what are you going to spend it . 
on? There's only the inferior 
goods made by the other people 
who are in the same racket as 
you are... 

LEARY: All right. Practical 
Step Number 6, which was 
suggested by Allen's last com¬ 
ment about conscientious ob¬ 
jectors: once you start these 
little religious groups you 
automatically have a solution 
to the draft problem. 

At Millbrook we formed our. 
little religious group. People 
come to me all the time and 
say , "What Should I do about 
the draft?" And I say, "DON'T 
JOIN IT! DON'T JOIN THE 
ARMY!" 

And once you start your 
religion, since we are of a 
belief that everyone is Buddha 
in the religion, everyone is 
either a guru or a monk or on 
the road, there's automatic 
protection against the draft , 
which forces young seed car¬ 
riers to kill other seed carr¬ 
iers. 

LEGAL SOLUTION 

So that the tribal, solution, 
to establish yourself legally as 
a tribe, as a religious totem 
tribe, not only protects you in 
your use of the sacrament, but 
it protects you in many ways— 
it protects you in the handling 

of money. i 


If you go out and make money, 
then you have to pay in income 
tax. The income tax then goes 
to support the war in Viet Nam. 

If you form a religion, the 
money thafs taken in is used 
for the religion.. . the formation 
of the legal tribal groups... I 
don't think we should be ROMAN¬ 
TIC anarchists... 

SNYDER: YOU'RE the one who : 
said, "Drop out." 

LEARY: This is the way to drop 
out. 

SNYDER: But you're accusing 
us of being romantic if we say 
we don’t want to use lawyers 
when we drop out. 

LEARY: All right, fine, I ad¬ 
mire you for dropping out far¬ 
ther than I am. (laughter) 
SNYDER: Farther than thou, 
(laughter) 

LEARY: I assure you, Gary,, 
that as soon as I've done this 
little yoga bit of passing on what 
I've learned and what I've. 
thought about, I'm dropping out 
too. I'm not going to spend the 
rest of my life... 

GINSBERG: What would you 
like to do ? 



week and I'm going to take hash¬ 
ish once a day at sunset and 
I'm going to have babies .and I'm 
going to learn from our babies. 
SNY DER: Thai! s beautiful. 

What are you going to do?’ 
WATTS: I'll tell you. I am 
trying to act as a pontifex, 
which is a briclge-builder, be¬ 
tween two worlds; the world of 
the people who are anxious and 
concerned and square and think 
that they can use their wills to . 
put things to right, and there¬ 
fore are asking what should be 
done and what should not be 
done; and on the other hand, 
the people who know that this is 
a delusion and a farce, and are 
dropping out. 

And I'm going to stay BANG 
in the middle and I'm going to 
learn the languages of both 
tribes. 

SNYDER: What'll you do after 
thal ? 

WATTS: This will take me the 
rest of my life, (laughter) 
SNYDER: Tim was talking 
about what he was going to do 
after that. 

LEARY: No, I want to comment 
on_what Alan has done in the _ 
last ten, fifteen, twenty... I 
don't know how long, you've 
been doing it.. .you have been 
living completely dropped out. 
And the tribute you paid Gary, 

I think should be paid to you. 
You've never collected your 
IBM check from the establish¬ 
ment. 

And you have influenced hun¬ 
dreds of thousands of people, 
millions of people. 

WATTS: But that's only to sayj 
Tim, that I've been in the posi¬ 
tion of somebody running his 
own private)business. I'm my 
own employer, I run my own 
business, like somebody who 
runs a barber shop on the 
corner or... 

LEARY: I wouldn't say that. 

I would say you're a wandering 
guru. You don't attach your¬ 
self to an ashram. You are, 
in the classic sense of the word, 
the perfect, effective, wander¬ 
ing mendicant. 

WATTS: Yes, it's true I do 
that, but I also support seven 


. LEARY: What are you going 
to do in India? 

GINSBERG: In India, just 
wander around and then apply 
for a visa to China... and 
find out how a tribal society 
s there, too. 



“BABY HASH” 

LEARY: I'm going to go away 
to a beach and life on the beach. 
I'm going to take LSD once a 


LEARY: Which is a trick that 
most gurus couldn't do'.' 
WATTS: And therefore I'm 
concerned to stay in the bridge 
position between these two 
worlds. 

LEARY: Well, suppose we had| 
a tribal situation which would 
take over the support of seven 
dependents. 

GINSBERG: I want my tribe 
card! 

What I want is to get some 
land and settle there, alone or 
with people, with enough money, 
to support electricity and a 
large house, and fiddle around 
with manuscripts and go walk¬ 
ing in the woods and then rush 
off and take a plane to India. 
That's what I'd like to do. 


WATTS: I'll tell you what I 
do want to do after all... when 
I'm through with this bridge¬ 
building business, when I'm 
over seventy years of age, 

I'm going to retire to a small 
plot of land... 

LEARY: Would you say "drop 
out", Alan? (laughter). 

PSYCHEDELIC HERBS 
WATTS: Well, I'll tell you. 

I'm going to cultivate an herb 
garden, and there will be three , 
patches. They'll be very small. 
One for culinary herbs, one for 
medicinal herbs, and one for 
psychedelic herbs. 

And alongside this little tiny 
garden, where the herbs grow, 
there will be a big wooden barn 
where they will all be hanging 
up to dry—in their little jars... 
(laughter) And I'll putter arouna ( 
there as an old man. 

That's beyond my present 
ideal of trying to be an interpre¬ 
ter, of not only East to West, 
but of the squares to the under¬ 
ground. 

LEARY: The young to the old. 
GINSBERG: Yeah, but if every¬ 
thing were reversed properly, 
wouldn't the squares become 
the Bodhisattvas, really?‘l 
What if we had a REAL revolu¬ 
tion and we were all wrong ?! 

GROUND OF THE UNIVERSE 
WATTS: Yes, but the squares 
are the very far-out people be¬ 
cause they don't know where 
they started from. 

You see, if by virtue of a psy¬ 
chedelic experience you know 
where you started from, you! 
know that you are basically the 
Ground of the Universe. 

But all these poor people ARE’ 
the Ground of the Universe, 
which has forgotten itself, and 
has gotten itself into a complet¬ 
ely far-out situation, where it 
doesn't know where it started. 
And so you must say to them: 
"Congratulations. " I 
LEARY: Practical Suggestion 
Number 6 is: I suggest that we 
have a series of Be-Ins start¬ 
ing in Europe in the middle of 






the summer, and that we con¬ 
tinue to have Be-Ins across 
Europe, perhaps retracing the 
steps of the Crusades. We 
could call it a Crusade of Peni¬ 
tence or... 

SNYDER; Children’s Crusade. 

.LEARY: Yeah, the Children's 
Crusade... And that we have a 
series of Be-Ins... Not that all 
of us have to be there, but some 
of us could drop in and on, and 
work towards the East this way. 
Because, I 'm convinced that 
what was started at the Human 
Be-In in San Francisco, gener¬ 
ated a momentum which must 
not be lost because of our parti¬ 
cular predilections with our 
own fantasies. And, without 
tight organization or leader¬ 
ship, but cellular collaboration, 
I'd like to see this thing move 
as cells always move, or as . 
clouds move, across this 
anguished and increasingly 
metallic planet... 

GINSBERG: "Anguished and 
increasingly metallic I" 

LEARY: Bad poetry?, 
GINSBERG: No, that was nice. 
LEARY: So I suggest that we 
have meetings in cities April 
21st. I suggest we have one 
national meeting perhaps June 
21st, and that we start moving 
through Europe to the East so 
that we would, on September 
21st, be on the door between 
India and China, with as many 
Indians or Westerners or peo¬ 
ple that we've picked up on the 
way... I think that's the quick¬ 
est way to end racial prejudice 
and the war in Viet Nam. 

CROSS CULTURAL PURPOSES 
SNYDER: Some cultures are 
not going to understand this; 
they're not ready for it. 
GINSBERG: You're not going 
to get more than 20,000 people, 
and that was done anyway by 
Shankara-deo and he got stopped 
at the border of Burma. The 
Burmese let him through but , 
the Chinese wouldn't let him 
through, and the Indians were 
upset... 

SNYDER; There's a social- 
historical problem here: Cali¬ 
fornia is the only place that is 
ready for this, probably... 

Like, you couldn't do this in 
Japan. 

LEARY: It's already done that. 
Why not ? 

SNYDER: No, but you can't do 
it yet. A great percentage of 
the world is going to have to 
move through the drama of 
Western culture and technology 
in some accelerated way, be¬ 
fore they're ready for this. 

America is the only culture 
in which a number of people 
have seen through it and are 
able to go beyond it. 

Japan isn't ready to, for 
example. It would be incredi¬ 
bly eccentric for them. No¬ 
body's ready to try it out. 



PEPSI DEGENERATION 
LEARY: I question that. I 
think that if you look at the 
spread of American ideology, 
France is just now starting it's 
superdrugstores. You must not 
fail to realize the authentic... 
deep American spirit behind 
this. And I think that if it's 
taken 15 years for France to 
accept the superdrugstore, why 
not six months to accept the 
Be-In in San Francisco? 

See, the way they spread 
drugs or Coca-Cola or Pepsi¬ 
Cola was, when Coca-Cola first 
showed up in the Grand Canal 
in Venice or Coca-Cola first 
showed up in Pakistan, it was 
considered eccentric. 

But if Pepsi-Cola can do it, 

'the energy and the cellular pro¬ 
ductivity which started here can 
move much more quickly because 
it's talking to deeper things in 
the human being than Pepsi¬ 
Cola. 

I think this thing should start 
moving. 

SNYDER: So many of these 
people in Africa and Asia are 
caught up in the drama of pro¬ 
gress. 

VfA: They want nothing more 
than to come to America and 
get a large apartment and a 
large car... 

SNYDER: This is part of the 
paradox. 

LEARY:. We can tell them... 

I feel the same way about the 
problem with the American 
Negro. Does he have to become 
a middle-class white before he 
can then go on and leave that? 

I don't think we have to go 
through these historical per¬ 
iods, I think it's possible to 
move it faster and to jump... 
SNYDER: Well, I hope it's 
possible to accelerate it, but 
you can't take it around the 
world this year, or next year.. 
LEARY: Are you sure? 

SNYDER: Yeah... I'm sure. . . 
GINSBERG: If we all got to¬ 
gether and tried we could. 

TEN MEN IN A DROP-OUT 
LEARY: I say ten people— 
ten men—who really would 
give to it can change this 
planet within a year. Ten men 


who would... drop out. 

SNYDER: If we change Ameri- 
ca we are changing the planet. 
LEARY: I'd like to have an 
electrician in my tribe. 

VfA: Everything that's been 
said here tonight is in the air, 
in Haight-Ashbury, right now. 
There's a movement for people 
to set up small, organic coop¬ 
eratives; not formal but small, 
organic cooperatives. There 
is a movement for people to 
move to the land, they want to 
get out of the city. 

There's only one thing, this 
would naturally set up small 
religions on the land, and that's 
where they should be. 

There is only one thing that 
I can see that is missing, and 
that is the land itself. If there 
is some way... 

As you said, Tim, we can 
get together without getting 
structured, perhaps, to encour¬ 
age people to set up small re¬ 
ligious groups, perhaps we can 
get together in some way to 
make it possible for people 
without money to acquire a 
small amount of land and go and 
live on the land and work on the 
land. 

I don't know if this is possi¬ 
ble. 

VfA: But the way to do it is by 
transferring information from 
people who already have DONE 
it! 

You see, we’re not creating 
anything. It's happening already, 
all we have to do is look at where 
it's happening and link those to¬ 
gether—just as far as the know¬ 
ledge and the experience of one 
group—and give that to those 
embryonic groups that aren't 
going already. 

VfA: Just give them some legal 
status so that they can. work the 
land... 

In other words, so that they 
can pay rent for it or buy it. 
Because when you drop out, you 
don't have money and it's diffi¬ 
cult to acquire land. 

Alan can do it, but you know, 
Alan's got something going for 
him but the kids haven't. They 
haven't got money to acquire 
the land, and they're looking 
for land. 


LEARY: That's ridiculous, 

Ok... Suppose eight or 
ten or five couples or a group 
of eight or ten meet, in the 
Haight Ashbury district, in one 
of-those meditation centers we 
set up. 

They say, hey, we want to 
get some land. Then they go to 
work maybe for six months, * 
They all take jobs and they all 
live in one house. So instead 
of paying eight rents, they pay 
one rent, and in that short per¬ 
iod they can make enough mon¬ 
ey to get started. That's no 
problem. 

Now, Michael (Bowen) just 
mentioned communication, I 
suggest that we use the San . 
Francisco Oracle; and Practi¬ 
cal Step No. 42 (laughter) is; 
Why don't we try to get the San 
Francisco Oracle distributed 
nation-wide ? So that it would 
. be a loose, non-structured, non- 
hierarchical way of passing on 
... and becoming a forum. 

VfA: We've already got some¬ 
body in Los Angeles who's go¬ 
ing to print an Oracle in Los 
Angeles. We're going to send 
them the negatives. We need 
somebody in New York to do 
the same. 

LEARY: We'll do that in New 
York. 

VfA: Chet Helms just came 
back from London and said the 
people from Indica Books are 
also interested in the Oracle. 
GINSBERG: Yeah, but the con¬ 
ditions described here don't 
really obtain in New York. What 
do you do in New York ? 

LEARY: New York needs a. tre¬ 
mendous amount of spiritual 
help and... 

SNYDER: I don’t think you live 
in New York. 

GINSBERG: There’s a lot of 
very beautiful people living in 
New York. 

SNYDER: _ Well, if .they all 
moved out of New York, they'd 
still be beautiful, and you could 
meet them someplace els,e. 
GINSBERG: That's a possibil¬ 
ity, You may have to go up to 
northern New York to... 
SNYDER; No, the gathering of 
the tribes is the modelof that. 
Cities are nothing but extended 
tribal gatherings which have be¬ 
come stabilized and made sort 
of semi-permanent. 

Like, what were originally 
temporary markets, temporary 
dances and temporary gather¬ 
ings. Except nobody goes away. 


COMING: 

In the next issue of the Oracle 
we hope to tell the truth about 
the American Indian,- past, pre¬ 
sent and future. We invite all 
and everyone to make known 
their tribal visions. 


31 





They just stay there all the time. 

Now, 'ou go to New York be¬ 
cause you want to see your 
friends and because the action 
is there. Now that's only about 
a thousand people, really. 

If those thousand people were 
living in the middle of the prai¬ 
rie in Nebraska., you'd go to 
the middle of the prairie in Neb¬ 
raska., you see ? Instead of New 
York. .. 

GINSBERG: Yeah, but I enjoy 
the beehive hum of New York. 
SYNDER: Well, you're corrupt 
. . . You're a transitional figure, 
Ginsberg... (laughter). 

VfA: Do you think as well when 
you live in New York? 
GINSBERG: Yeah, and slightly 
different thoughts. 

LEARY: Allen is the mayor of 
one of the busiest, most popu¬ 
lous precincts of New York. 

A DEER PARK 

SNYDER: It's not an environ¬ 
ment one would want to live in 
■because the air is filthy. . . 
GINSBERG: It's certainly in¬ 
teresting to figure out what to 
do with New York. But what 
are we going to do with seven 
million people? 

SNYDER: Seven million people 
will be dead within 70 years. 

Gil iBERG: So you think the 
she is of buildings will be left 
sta nding and there will be a re- 
duc d population ? 

SNYDER: Why not? 

'LEARY: There will be deer 
grf ing in Times Square in 40 
ye: rs. 

GI 3BERG: ... Hell, possibly! 
SN DER: They'll just think of 
something else, and leave it be- 
hi> . That's happened to many 
cit" s. .. Look at Angkor-Wat, 
the all left it. 

LI RY: Rome, Jerusalem,... 
Ch hen Itza, Alexandria, etc.. . 
G': BERG: Oh yeah, but where 
a i even million people going 

to >? 

SN DER: They're going to die. 
GI SBERG: They're all going 
to lie, and not have children? 

SI DER: Their children won't 


necessarily be there. Some 
may want to go someplace else. 
GINSBERG: What are you go- 
,ing to do with seven million 
children? 

SNYDER: They'll be someplace 
else. 

GINSBERG: When? Seven mil¬ 
lion people take a lot of land. 
SNYDER: No, they just spread 
out (laughter). Like, what hap¬ 
pened to the children of the peo¬ 
ple who left Angkor-Wat? They 
left it. 

GINSBERG: Some got killed. 
SNYDER: A lot of them got 
killed. A lot of people are go¬ 
ing to die. 

GINSBERG: Now, how do you 
think this is going to happen? 
People are just going to die 
off, or. .. 

SNYDER: No, people are going 
to change their feelings. The 
drama is changing. What peo¬ 
ple are interested in is not 
things but states of mind. That 
is the cultural shift that is tak¬ 
ing place now. 

WATTS: Now, this is a very 
important statement. 

SNYDER: We've turned a cor¬ 
ner. It's a bigger comer than 
the Reformation, probably. It's 
a. comer on the order of the 
change between Paleolithic and 
Neolithic. 

It's like one of the three or 
four major turns in the history 
of man—not just culture —but 
man. 

WATTS: Right. Now. An enor¬ 
mous number of people go into 
the heart of New York every 
day for no other reason than to 
shop. 

They are to a large extent 
frustrated women living in those 
wretched dormitories. Their 
husbands are working, and the 
women go in in order to get some 
kind of a sense of existence, of 
being, by buying things! 

Now supposing it happens that, 
instead of that, they change their 
state of mind; and instead of go¬ 
ing out and getting goosed by 
buying something, they change 
their state of mind sitting where 


they are in the first place. 

Then Bonwit Teller.. .every¬ 
thing in the middle of town, simp- 
kJ ly collapses! Lord & Taylor, 

§ and so on, have no more reason 
g for existence. 

cp It's like Market Street in San 
Francisco, where everything is 
•> slowly falling apart because it's 
^ so ridiculous to park there and 
„ you can't get at the place, any- 
l> how. 

SjJ GINSBERG: But where are 
aj people going to buy their Uher 
jape recorder machines... 
SNYDER: Suppose they don't 
want them? 

GINSBERG: Well, we all have 
them. 

SNYDER: But we're transition¬ 
al figures... 

LEARY: We'll byy 'em from 
Viet Nam... ? 

SNYDER: We don't need them. 

I would be happy to hear Larry 
Bird sing his Com Dance and I 
don't want to tape it. I'll hear 
it and that's in my mind for the 
rest of my life. 

WATTS: Right. 

GINSBERG: I mean, the pro¬ 
blem here is there's a wither¬ 
ing away of the state. 

LEARY: It's called: Let the 



state disintegrate, Allen. 
GINSBERG: In an advanced, 
technology such as we are talk¬ 
ing about unless you can ima¬ 
ginatively transform it into 
some Buckminster Fuller pro¬ 
cess, you know, and each in¬ 


dividual tribe can operate and 
create whatever it needs. 

Other than that there is the 
technology as we know it now, 
like a large electronic network. 
SNYDER: I think that the tech¬ 
nology withers away as people 
learn to do it themselves. It's 
more interesting to do it your¬ 
self at home with your friends. 
Like, sit around and blow the 
buffalo hom and blow the conch 
horn and not turn on the tele¬ 
vision. 


GINSBERG: That was like con¬ 
ditions that were possible when 
the continent held 15 million 
Indians. But now the continent 
holds a. great many more. 
WATTS: The whole problem 
is reproduction. It's not only 
the reproduction of the species 
in a sexual way, but reproduc¬ 
tion as we are now reproducing 
what we are saying on tape. 

Because if, supposing this 
conversation were very turned 
on and far out (I don't know 
whether it is or not) people 
would say: "Oh, what a pity 
that didn't get recorded. " 

Because, see, 'It didn't 
really HAPPEN unless it was 
recorded. " And increasingly 
we're developing all kinds of 
systems for verifying reality 
by echoing it. 

SNYDER: Well, trained minds 
remember and the words of the 
Buddha were all remembered b 
by oral tradition. And they 
came down for two hundred 
years before anybody put it 
down in writing because people 
were paying attention to what 
he said. 

VfA: Only then did they start 
embellishing it. 

WATTS: But Krishnamurti 
would argue that remembering 
it was already a. fallacy. 
SNYDER: Well, he's very pure 
(laughter). 

That which is really worth¬ 
while is what you remember. 
And if you've forgotten it, it 
wasn't that great. Or, like, if 





you can't remember it then 
that's too bad. 

• Part of what happens to us 
with civilization is that we lose 
the faculty of memory. In non¬ 
literate civilizations the capa¬ 
city to remember and transmit 
songs and tales and myths is 
extraordinary. 

Like, Melville Herskovitz, 
when he did his field work in 
Dahomey, found one raconteur • 


civilization is taking place 
and that people disgusted with 
the cybernetic civilization are 
dropping away and becoming 
whatever it is... something 
else. 

There is a division, be¬ 
cause the children of the peo¬ 
ple who drop out, don't drop 
back in. Their tribal customs 
are different. They look diff¬ 
erent. The children follow 
the adults and so on. 


GINSBERG: I don't think they- 
are all. gonna, go out on a 
limb. I think they'll wind up 
dropping back in. 




who could tell 3,500 folk tales, 
all different. 

VfA: Gary, in anthropology 
isn't it true that when you train 
yourself and learn an oral tra¬ 
dition, writing is not necessary 
and it's only when we start to 
use words that we've lost the 
oral tradition ? 

LEARY: Written words. 

SELF-EDITING 

SNYDER: The thing about the 
oral tradition is that it's self¬ 
editing and that which is not . 
worth saving drops out. So you 
i don't get this extraordinary 
accumulation of trivia in the 
libraries. / 

VfA: We should consider^what 
IS happening, what actually is 
happening. Not so much the 
ideal but what aetimrfy is tak¬ 
ing place. / 

GINSBERG: There's a. big 
bust supposedly announced in 
the Haight,Ashbury either by 
rumor or by reality... John 
Sinclair is busted in Detroit 

VfA: At the same time, we 
should realize the cybernetic 


. VfA: You have to be loving 
while this transition is taking 
place so that it doesn't get 
bloody. Because if it should 
get bloody, then you lose the 
core of the consciousness 
that's trying to come through. 

Because if you have" to re¬ 
sist evil on its terms, you 
have to take some of that poi¬ 
son into yourself and therefore 
dilute what's taking place. 

So the loving attitude has got 
to be thought of constantly. 
People must be educated in 
that regard. 

GINSBERG: What's interest¬ 
ing about that is that finally 
in Viet Nam — what you do 
(lave is a. collection of tribes 
being organized by various 
parties and finding themselves 
in'the middle of a large-scale 
fight. 

, 7 What do you feel about 
Rubin and Savio's concern 
with Viet Nam ?' I saw Savio 
weeping about the Viet Nam 
war... an image of the Viet 
Nam war in his mind. 

‘POT”: REBELLION OR RELIGION 
LEARY: Well, that's a diff¬ 
erent thing. I respect his 
sincerity, but his tactics are 
part of the game which creat¬ 
ed the Viet Nam war — power 
politics. 

i want to suggest Practical 
Suggestion Number 99, and that 
is some way of reminding the 


young people who are being 
busted for pot that they are in¬ 
volved in something tremendous¬ 
ly holy. 

In India today the people who 
have the most respect, in some 
quarters, are those who went to 
jail for their principles during 
the independence fight. You can't 
be a. politician in India today 
unless you went to jail with 
Gandhi. 

I see the people being put in 
jail today for the possession of 
marijuana as being in a very 
similar position. 

I would say that 90 per cent 
of the people in jail in the Uni¬ 
ted States today (and there must 
be 40 or.50 thousand of them) 
belong to three groups: they 
are either young, creative or 
they are minority groups. 

There are very few WHITE, 
MIDDLE-CLASS Americans in 
Jail for possession of mari¬ 
juana. 

I think it is important to 
give the young pot smokers 
and the young acid heads a 
sense of their historical 
meaning, that they're doing 
the most important thing that 
could be done, that they're 
not rebels. The choice is be¬ 
tween being rebellious and 
being religious. 

GINSBERG: Do you feel, for 
instance... I was talking about 
that the other day and some¬ 
one mentioned the young cats 
who went south as activists 
for the Negroes — who felt 
that they had like an equal 
perception of reality around 
them and were like, really 
heroic, and were doing as 
. much as any drug group for ex¬ 
tension of consciousness and 
extension of relationships. 
LEARY: I don't think so. You 
see, I feel very clear about this 
one issue, that you can't DO 
go»d unless you FEEL good. 

You can't do right unless you 
feel right. 

I think it's so easy to an Amer¬ 
ican to go off to another place 
where you look down on a prim¬ 
itive people and spread the mis¬ 
sionary zeal. - 

I think that many of the white 
middle-class intellectuals who 
went south during the civil rights 
movements were like Baptist 
missionaries, who went to far- 
out places to make themselves 
feel virtous. 

I don't think any good was 
done by that. 

GINSBERG: You can say the 
same thing about anybody who's 
taking acid, to make themselves 
virtuous. 

LEARY: Oh, I agree, if you 
take acid for a sense of... 

•THE QUALITY OF PEOPLE 
GINSBERG: So, if you go south 
with that sense, yes.. .But I'm 
impressed by the quality of the 
people that I met who have been 
south, or by the quality of their 
statements, or by the quality of 
their art. 


VfA: If we are tellingkids 
they are doing something holy, 
to a certain extent we have to 
be a little bit holy. Holiness 
is giving and we have to learn 
to give. 

The Diggers have said that, 
since the Be-In on Jan. 14, thou¬ 
sands and thousands of kids— 
who don't really know where 
they're at, but who are attracted 
because they want to know where 
they are at, have come to the 
city. 

But they come to the city and 
they don't know whether to be 
defiant; they don't know what to 
be. And unless they can become 
bridges for themselves, each 
person a bridge for themselves 
so they can show what they 
HAVE got is something giving. 

Vet the message doesn't get 
across. 

VfA: We've got to become 
saints. 

SNYDER: Which is not even a 
silly thing to say. 

MEDITATION CENTERS 
LEARY: They've got to be told 
that they're pursuing the holiest 
role. 

Well, again, if we had these 
meditation centers in all cities 
there would be centers where 
the Gita would be read, where 
the aneient Sutras would be- 
read, where they would be re¬ 
minded. This is not teaching.. . 
SNYDER: What we need is per¬ 
sonal example all over the 
place. 



LEARY: I would suggest that 
in these meditation centers 
there be some program of read¬ 
ings, not in the sense of educa¬ 
ting or teaching facts, but just 
REMINDING young people and. 
any person who drops out and 
turns on that they are a part of 
an ancient profession, the only 
holy profession. 

The profession has kept the 
flame going and it certainly 
should express itself in pushing 
that Mercedes. 

VfA; Do you think it's practical 
to try to get some sort of medi¬ 
tation in the public schools? 
LEARY: No. Drop out of the 
public schools. The public 
schools cannot be compromised. 
with. 

VfA; Why say you can't com¬ 
promise with the public schools 
if you're going to compromise 
with the technology? jjjj 










LEARY: We're not compromis¬ 
ing with IBM or General Elec¬ 
tric. We're simply saying, as 
Gary has said, that part of 
man's karmic heritage is the 
ability to do incredible things 
with his hands and his analytic 
mind. But they should be holy 
things. 

SNYDER: It's a question of 
right occupation or right con¬ 
duct. It's not that technology is 
bad, or that schools are bad. 

JOY AND DELIGHT 
WATTS: Well, now look here. 
What are we saying when we 
say something is holy? That 
means that you should take a 
different attitude to what you 
are doing than you were, for 
example, doing it for kicks. 

Now there's a curious thing 
here. I have noticed with Allen 
Ginsberg that when he chants 
Hindu sutras he doesn't do it 
in a pious way. 

There's a JOYOUSNESS and 
a feeling of DELIGHT to doing 
this chant that has more zip to 
it than anything we knew in the 
past as being holy. 

Now when you were doing 
something holy in the past you 
had to put on a solemn expres¬ 
sion of saying we are doing this 
but it hurts, but it's good for 
us . He is not doing that when 
he chants that. 

He's not saying it hurts and 
therefore it's good for me. 

He's saying it's good for me 
because I enjoy it. It's gor¬ 
geous ! 

I'm going right in there and 
I'm going to say ail these Om 
Hare Rama Krishna Rama Hare 
Rama Hare et cetera. You see? 
LEARY: He's turning himself 
on. 

WATTS: Right. I told some 
nuns a little while ago, when 
the mother superior came and 
they were alltalkingabout the 
reform of the liturgy and how 
the Catholic church has gotten 
itself into a mess by translat¬ 
ing the Latin liturgy into terri¬ 
ble English and all the magic 
has gone out of it, And I said 
you should come and listen to 
Allen Ginsberg chant the sutras 
because then you'd know how to 
celebrate mass properly. 

So, when we are talking about 
something being holy, we've got 
to be very careful. 

Gary, you were saying all 
’right, people have got to be 
saints, and you said—well, 
that's not just a joke to say 
this. 

But it's got to be saints in an 
entirely new sense. Not this 
masochistic kind of sainthood, 
whereby: "I am holy because I 
hurt and the amount of person¬ 
al hurt that I've piled up is the 
MEASUREIfof my holiness. " 
SNYDER: Well, that's the 
Judaeo-Christian idea that says, 
the Cross is at the center of the 
30 universe. 


LEARY: Of course, what most 
Americans don't realize is that 
the Buddha was the greatest 
hipster of all, in the sense that 
he was the person that was 
teaching people how to up-level 
suffering and to turn. on. 



KRISHNA! KRISHNA! KRISHNA! 


GINSBERG: So what do you 
think of Swami Bhaktivedanta 
pleading for the acceptance of 
Krishna in every direction? 
SNYDER: Why it's a lovely 
positive thing to say Krishna. 

It's a beautiful mythology and 
it's a beautiful practice. 

LEARY: Should be encouraged 
GINSBERG: He feels it's the 
one uniting thing. He feels a 
monopolistic unitary thing about 
that. 

WATTS: I'll tell you why I 
think he feels this. The man- 
trams, the images of Krishna, 
have in this culture no FOUL 
associations. The word God is 
contaminated so Tillich would 
say "The Ground of Being" in¬ 
stead of God. ANYTHING ex¬ 
cept saying God. 

The words; "Get down on 
your knees and be humble be¬ 
fore your heavenly father. " 

That gives everybody the 
CREEPS. It's just AWFUL to 
say something like that, you 
see, because all these Christ¬ 
ian images have horrible assoc¬ 
iations attached to them. 

Whereas when somebody 
comes in from the Orient with a 
new religion which hasn't got 
any of these associations in our 
minds, all the words are new, 
all the rites are new, and yet, 
somehow it has feeling in it, 
and we can get with that, you 
see, and we can dig that! 

And it can do something for us 
that it can't do in Japan. For 
example, in Japan, when young 
people hear the Buddha, sutra 


chanted they think oohhh! Don't 
let's hear that thing, because 
they associate all that with 
"fogeyism. " 

Here in the Buddhist churches, , 
in the Niseis, (Japanese Amer¬ 
icans) they can't stand it when 
the priests chant the sutras in 
Sino-Japanese language for the 
oldsters. 

They want to hear: (singing) 
"Buddha loves me this I know, 
for the Sutra tells me so. " 
(laughter) 

They want to be as much as 
they can like Protestants be¬ 
cause that's exotic to them. 
GINSBERG: But what about In¬ 
dia., where we do have a. giant 
psychedelic community and ma¬ 
ny tribal groups and tribal ga¬ 
therings which serve as a mo¬ 
del for our own? What kind of 
a material system is that, and 
would that be acceptable to Mar¬ 
io Savio? 

SNYDER: Sure it's acceptable. 
There's only one trouble with 
India and that's things like goats. 
WATTS: Goats!! 

ECOLOGICAL IGNORANCE 
SNYDER: Because the goats 
eat the trees. As soon as you 
plant young seedling trees the 
goats eat them. 

So India has for the last thou¬ 
sand years suffered from a 
blight of deforestation. 

So again there is a kind of 
ecological ignorance that has 
plagued India for about a mil- 
lenium now.. .water and land 
use ignorance. And that begins 
because they are too far re¬ 
moved from their primitive un¬ 
derstanding and connection with 
things. 

Like something really seems 
to go wrong when you get into 
agriculture. As soon as people 
get into agriculture they lose a. 
sense of animals and of wild 
plants and they lose those con¬ 
nections. 

Like I'm not saying what to 
do about that, but there is a 
very important thing there that's 
lost. Just like the whole use of 
natural psychedelics goes out 
when we enter agriculture. 

The tribes, the peoples who 
knew what plants would turn you 
on, are generally primitive and 
non-agricultural. 

As soon as you get onto agri¬ 
culture you become concerned 
with cultivated plants and the 
whole knowledge of the use of 
wild herbs and wild plants drops 
out. 


THE ORACLE SPEAKS 
LEARY: Practical suggestion 
99A (laughter).. .We all put 
words down, but I think that 
each of us should contribute 
when we feel like it, perhaps 
the yoga of once a month, a. few 
paragraphs or perhaps a page 
or two to the Oracle. We can 
use the Oracle as our means of 
sharing... 

GINSBERG: Well, you see, that 


is already building a politics and 
an organization. 

VfA: You don't have to call it 
an organization. 

GINSBERG: We share the Ora¬ 
cle and the Oracle is distributed 
in 9 cities. So that already in¬ 
volves us in dropping in again. 
SNYDER: I don't mind that. 
LEARY: I don't want pay for it. 
SNYDER: This whole goddamn 
dualism or whatever it is, this 
confusion bugs me. 

LEARY: Allen is upset about 
my saying drop out. He's not 
ready yet; Allen, drop out when 
you're ready. Don't worry a- 
bout it, drop out when you're 
ready. 

GINSBERG: But I'm not worried, 
I'm having a good time. 

SNYDER : I've never been in, 
what I'm interested in is build¬ 
ing a. new society. 

GINSBERG: I think the whole 
thing of "in" and "out" is a mis¬ 
take someway. 

VfA: Well, we live with it. We 
live within the illusion, so being 
in or out is really absurd. 
SNYDER: Like people say — 
'Beatniks are all conformists', 
as they said at one time, but 
that's irrelevant. Of course, 
you're conformists to a. differ¬ 
ent order of things. 

HELL’S HAPPENING 
WATTS: Well, let's look at it 
in another way. Robert Oppen- 
heimer is reported to have said, 
quite recently that, "Obviously 
the world is going to hell, and 
the only way that it could be 
stopped was not to try to prevent 



it from happening. " (laughter) 
[Ed. note: Robert Oppenheimer 
died a short time before publi¬ 
cation date of the Oracle] 
LEARY: The guy who invented 
the atomic bomb (laughs ner¬ 
vously). 

WATTS: In other words, when 
there is a game going oh that is 
on a collision course, and when 
this game is obviously going to 
lead to total destruction, the 
only vyay to get people out of the 
bad game is to indicate that the 
game is no longer interesting. 

See, we've left this game and 
it bores us and we've got-some¬ 
thing going on over here which 
(cont.p.40) 34 





SB. from p. S 

Some have asked whether a. 
great teacher has come and gone 
already and has been unrecog¬ 
nized. 

Some have wondered whether 
Kennedy's death showed us a 
wave.of the Divine manifesting 
in human affairs, snatching a- 
way our discovery as soon as 
the import of his vision for a 
needing world had moved the 
hearts of men. 

But just as the meeting of Sa¬ 
turn and Jupiter in Pisces pro¬ 
vided the rare combination of 
energies for the incarnation of 
the Christ in the man Jesus, so 
the stellium in Aquarius with 
Saturn and Jupiter conjunct in 
the sign of the Water-Bearer 
brought forth cosmic energies 
that will bring the emergence 
of the World-Teacher with his 
Spiritual Hierarchy of helpers 
who will awake, one by one, to 
their true role. 

The time may be soonerthan 
we think. We may not have to 
wait for the divine child brought 
forth recently to grow up for 
roles important to the next gen¬ 
eration. In the book External- 
ization of the Hierarchy by 
Alice A. Bailey it is hinted that 
the body which the. Great Lord 
will occupy in His appearance 


as World Teacher may have 
already been bom at about the 
.close of World War I and be 
awaiting the hour when human¬ 
ity is ready for the message. 

One of the great mysteries 
emerging under psychedelic 
substances is the recognition 
that the physical self is but a 
vehicle for the manifestation of 
soul forces which can be trans¬ 
mitted, transferred and stimu¬ 
lated like rays of Divine Light. 
Thus Incarnation means not just 
birth but Spiritual Birth, the 
Grace of the embodiment of the 
White Light, the Atman becom-. 
ing Brahman — in purest form 
in the Great Ones, the guides 
of the race, but also in you and 
you and you. 

In the Bhagavad Gita , both the 
general and the specific mani¬ 
festation of the Divine are set 
forth: 

He who sees the Supreme 
Lord abiding equally in all 
beings, never perishing 
when they perish, he, ver¬ 
ily, sees. 

He is without and within all 
beings. He is unmoving and 
also moving. He is too sub¬ 
tle to be known. He is far 
away and yet He is near. 


Thou shouldst tell me of 
Thy divine manifestations, 
without exceptions, where¬ 
by, pervading these worlds, 
Thou dost abide in them and 
beyond. 

This form of Mine which is 
indeed very hard to see, 
thou hast seen.~ Even the 
gods are ever eager to see 
this form. 

And I am lodged in the 
hearts of all; from me 
are memory and know - 
ledge as well as their loss. 

I am indeed He who is to 
be known by all the Vedas. 

I indeed am the author of 
the Vedanta and I, too, the 
knower of the Vedas. 

Among thousands of men, 
scarcely one strives for 
perfection, and of those 
who strive and succeed, 
scarcely one knows me 
in truth. 

He who knows in truth 
this glory (Manifesta¬ 
tion) and power (steady 
action) of Mine is united 
with Me by unfaltering 
yoga; of this there is no 
doubt. 


Know me, OArjuna, to 
be the eternal seed of all 
existences. I am the in¬ 
telligence of the intelli¬ 
gent, the splendor of the 
splendid. 

BE THOU NOUGHT BUT 
MY TOOL. 

When righteousness de¬ 
clines, Oh Bharata, or 
weakening of right prin¬ 
ciples, when wickedness 
is strong, I rise, from 
age to age, and take a 
visible shape, and move 
a man with men. Suc¬ 
coring the good and 
thrusting evil back, and 
setting virtue on her 
seat again. 

THE COLLABRIA 

We present the Collabria as 
a liberating new term and mo¬ 
del — a. cosmological concept 
which we think can melt some 
thought-barriers for humanity. 
The term Collabria was re¬ 
ceived through revelation and 
its authorship must be attribu¬ 
ted to higher sources. 

What does Collabria mean ? 
We'll have to talk all around 
the question to make it clear, 
since all terms are semantic 
limitations, both revealing 
and concealing meanings. If 
the terms God, Brahman, the 
Buddha nature and so on were 
understood in their broadest 
senses, we would have no new 
terms for cosmic realities. 

But all terms undergo stereo¬ 
typing — hardening of the ca¬ 
tegories. 

Teilhard de Chardin comes 
perhaps closest to Cellabria 
with his term, Noosphere: a 
humanized energy belt which 
has changed the world, bring¬ 
ing it ever closer to total en¬ 
lightenment and the comple¬ 
tion of its destiny. 

But by Collabria. we mean 
to focus more on the vital in¬ 
teraction between man and 
man, humanity and the Spirit¬ 
ual Hierarchy of the Planet 
and man and Divinity than pre¬ 
sent terms imply. 

Collabria is the total en¬ 
lightenment process working 
out in our cosmos. It is the 
divine yeast of interacting en¬ 
ergies working on us in ways 
good and bad, harmonious and 
inharmonious, beautiful and 
ugly, evil and good, false and 
true, to bring about the spir¬ 
itualizing of all that is , the 
stimulating of awareness and 
the removal of separative bar¬ 
riers to facilitate a total en¬ 
lightenment within our planet¬ 
ary life. 

The Collabria implies uni¬ 
fied working together on all le¬ 
vels of awareness to purify, 
broaden and harmonize the in¬ 
teracting energy-field stream- 
through our lives. It includes 
(cont. p. 39) 35 



























FROZEN IN THE TAO-VERSE 

In the winter’s hair, we walked among the 

Apples. Rosetta, jewel ol sound 
l have fallen in love with the air, and you 
Vegetable world. 

You are a wall to my hands 
I do not move, as the ox 
Nor swim, as the dove 

Is there silence in the palm tree, Arab brothers? 

THREE THREE, lines ol words 
You, reader, l may eat the shit 
ol one thousand goats, 

You, reader, l may climb into the 
Woman shaman 

Africa, bleeding FATHERS 
ASIA, weeping sisters 


[ ~Jker&. is a Bread u/tfhtowtcs ins'<de spr«ymg liglttnikyH 
l burning >K. our wrfw/ 

r One. bile, and iho. uuderseA. serpents begiu,i 
fleon heads fhosyhoretce. at fke tips cP our 'poAe* 

L and swim. etc n>si elecfricait arcs when u>e tau.c.Lc, » 
r token cue {ouch. an. auima£ arecefure. 

IpeaM-ieoud Scl/ient-bl/ng in &irtk& Coverts deep in. the efar/cj 

heart 

Afeah^ until et crooning sqwr h of -fcuch begins from ent 
^ luring it UP into Soluble praps embrace; —** 

r 4. Moment-fo be so held 
against destruction .! Lifted up in fiery showers *A 
kldk. above jewel avalanches jstewiUng toward coating \ < 

V J acid sea a! 0 atwitting acids devour . A 
' death gleam by gleam Undersea, in* er A 11 
. Makeshift funnels of s+©nje <xm 4 dr op 
( Vine. sfrmij po voder £rt>vw. passing cl©^«Cs<; 

. C<ay by day on our yausing forehead* ^ 
touched by the lour sky / O 
[(our foreheads Wusk againtf serpent-bellies of air < 
Has <f e fO.$s by on. streets of Machinery &r pain. 

' r / ^t£r Hsi’sH diamonds'm our Eye. ’ —" 
Candour steps crack ne<m wrinklings. ^ 
>frovn fhese streets leaping about u<* like. 

I kaskfets cf serpettte veering away fnne our 
K £UT WE WOVE to Yod J UNKNOWN ONB-, &LUE- 

MAGNETIC STRANGER, MlGH [ ^ . 
yjhJf&uiuisHely painful Bread burning in, our u/tndooUj j 
' this' dough tf OUr heads Waiting tjour* 
fiery+pucW - 

[0MK4ersea Serpents begun alive erf your hack! 

dud. these towers intide spraying lyttmg < 
f for your fdc e -fo appear it© for an lujfaut- unshadoiM ) 

^ "r Spreading away ■*=. 

* S'niile oia. s vn\le #P delightl 
K Tc pcive~tUese streets w'rtU. stones of a bearable) 
tijtf! " ^ Jj 

^Heaven in our EVt anp earth /a ot/«. * 

PR£AI> OF LIFE!: 

(j)a*te/ Jdjeore J 


/ am awake to the chant ol a swami 
We are all planets in the Taoverse 
Silver sacred hearts of junkie painters 
To their sun declare 

Dancing through Santa Clara in California 
Saving taxi drivers from death 
Pissing on apples, Four brassieres in 
the Eye of an Alphabet 

And still there is the death ol the young Camus. 


38 


Israel Halpem 








visible, invisible, & indivisible 
■aspects of the planetary (FR0M35) 
life, it avoids dichotomies of 
I-you, spirit-matter, God-man 
that have plagued philosophers 
and theologians for centuries. 

We will have to act out a Col- 
labrian way of life before we 
can discover fully what this a- 
mount of brotherhood and mu¬ 
tual identification can mean. 

We feel alienated from God be¬ 
cause He is conceived as "up 
there" and limited to the good, 
the true and the beautiful. Col- 
labria. is all of us plus the world 
of spiritual forces, and is here 
and now — the Lila of the Di¬ 
vine Dance being danced on a . 
twentieth century stage at the 
two-thirds point of 1967.• 

You are a Collabrian, so am 

I. Let's act like it — whatever 

that means. We owe it to the 
total Collabria to live up to a 
new model of unified harmony. 
An energized thought-wave that 
is yours this moment may be 
mine with the next breath. May 
you find the vision to give it 
glory, beauty and Light. I 
need i t. | 

FUTURE ECONOMIC 
SYSTEMS 

"There are adepts who are 
thorities upon modern financial 
matters, and these initiates of 
the fourth degree are competent¬ 
ly preparing to institute iater 
•those newer techniques and modes 
of financial interplay which will 
supersede the present disastrous 
methods; they will inaugurate a 
system of barter and exchange, 
of which modern money is the 
.travestied symbol. This newer 
method of financial relationships 
will be comprehensively human 
and it will supersede big business 
and private enterprise. It will, 
at the same time, however, re¬ 
tain those phases of modern en¬ 
terprise which will draw out the 
initiative and the resourcefulness 
of the individual"'.. . In this stage 
of economic reorientation, hu¬ 
manity will be relieved of all 
economic anxiety and will be free 
to rebuild the world and humani¬ 
ty in an enlightened pattern. 

When the world is ready for ah 
over-all financial adjustment, 
the principle of sharing will be a 
recognized motivating concept of 
the new civilization. "This will 
not involve beautiful, sweet and 
humanitarian attitudes. The 
world will still be full of selfish 
.and self-seeking people, but pub¬ 
lic opinion will be such that cer¬ 
tain fundamental ideals will mo¬ 
tivate business,- being forced on 
s business by public opinion; the 
fact that the new general ideas 
will in many cases be governed 
fby the expedience of interplay 
|will not basically matter. It is 
the sharing that is of importance. 
When an avatar called the "ad¬ 
juster of finances" appears, he 
will find conditions greatly 
changed from those now preva¬ 
lent. 

II. The principle of barter and 


exchange, (to the benefit of all 
concerned) will control. 

2. Owing to the development 
of atomic energy on behalf of 
human welfare, national curren¬ 
cies will have been largely super¬ 
seded, not only by a system of 
barter but by a universal mone¬ 
tary exchange — representative 
of the bartered goods when they 
are relatively small and unim¬ 
portant — and by a planned scale 
of related values. National ma¬ 
terial assets and the needed co¬ 
mmodities will all be provided 
for under an entirely new sys¬ 
tem. 

3. Private enterprise will 

still exist, but will be regulated; 
the great public utilities, the 
major material resources and 
the sources of planetary wealth- 
iron, steel, oil and wheat, for 
instance — will be owned in the 
first place by a governing, con¬ 
trolling international group; they 
will, however, be prepared for 
international consumption by na¬ 
tional groups chosen by the peo¬ 
ple and under international dir¬ 
ection . "___ 

GURU (cont. from p.^) 
communally, turn on, and tune 
in wherever you are. It's hard, 

I know, to be a Hippie Tribe in 
a Midwestern town or. in the 
Bible Belt. But if Haight-Ash- 
bury goes topless and booze- 
oriented, property of the syn¬ 
dicates, there should be other 
centers ready to receive the 
refugees. 

"1 is the business of the fu¬ 
ture, " wrote Alfred North 
Whitehead, "to be dangerous. " 

The business of the future 
must be carried o». If not, 

. there will probably be no future. 

Be dangerous—love somebody 

toda £L_=__ 

TEO— cont. from p. 25 
quences pharmaceutical atro¬ 
pine should be readily available. 

The A. pantherina is the 
safest to ingest but the similar¬ 
ity between it and the deadly 
poisonous A. phalloides makes 
the pantherina extremely dan¬ 
gerous because of the possibil¬ 
ity of mistaken identity. The A. 
muscaria is easy to identify 
(see any illustrated guide book, 
especially The Mushroom Hunt¬ 
ers Field Guide . Alexander H. 
Smith, 1966). 

If you take the mushroom trip, 
exercise extreme caution. Stay 
away from the A. pantherina 
unless you know for sure that' 
it's not the phalloides ( for a 
good reproduction of the phal¬ 
loides and its deadly cousin, 
the A. phalloides var. R., bet¬ 
ter known as "the destroying 
angel", see The National Geo¬ 
graphic. vol. 37, p, 387, 1920). 

The toxic effects of the A. 
muscaria can be partially elim¬ 
inated by removing the skin and 
warts of the caps . >r by mari¬ 
nating the mushroom in salt or 
vinegar, or by drinking milk 


when the mushroom is ingested 
(these are traditional means 
of making the mushroom safe 
for ingestion ). But since the pre¬ 
ponderance of the muscarine 
and atropine is located in the 
skin and warts, you might not 
get;high if you eliminate or neu¬ 
tralize the surface areas. 

You might read The Sacred 
Mushroom by Andrija Puharich 
so that you may better attain a 
- state of grace for the mush¬ 
room trip. 

BOM BOM (cont. from p. 21) 
philosophy of India has made 
us reflect that we are not wise 
to let circles close around de¬ 
finitions unless escaping on the 
smoke rings of the mind to 
other things not of the mind. 

To find reverence for lovely 
thighs brushing brave passions 
with caressing lips, and breasts 
to bite and kiss in ways that 
keep forever living in the 
smoke, incense, and prayers 
. of bhang and charas and gainja 
—all derived from hemp—to 
smoke ethereal substances re¬ 
ceived from god and ten times 
more potent than the hemp der¬ 
ivatives available to Western 
man, whose preference for 
alcohol stir hungers it will nev¬ 
er sate. The wine of the grape 
leads men to war, not to the 
spirit. Alcohol is ingested and 
men are lost because, drunk 
and mistaking the moral of the 
wafer as they have that of the 
wine, and cannabalistic, they 
eat meat until gorged to reple¬ 
tion. 

We in the West prefer pos¬ 
tures while in the East lile as¬ 
sumes postures of love, and 


while life sleeps hate dreams 
of love. We are the god love 
discovers. Man has emerged 
with crucible in hand, remade 
by the discovery that LSD is 
Promethean fire, and desire 
is free to discover delight in 
hidden gardens. 



An Evening with THE FUGS Sat¬ 
urday, April 22 — 8:30 p.m. Ber¬ 
keley Community Theatre. Adm: 
$2.50, $3.50, $4.50. Ticket*: Down¬ 
town Center B.O., 325 Mason St., 
SF, (RR. 5-2021)! Sherman Clay B. 
O., 2135 Broadway, Oakland (HI 4- 
8575)! Record City, 2340 Telegraph, 















think it worth the point to say 
there's something else going on. 
GINSBERG: It doesn't sound 
alliterativelly correct though. 
Tune in, turn on... there's 
something else by God! (laugh¬ 
ter) Unless his language is in¬ 
terpreted in a way which is un¬ 
derstandable and acceptable... 
WATTS: Well now, look here 
Tim, in that thing at Santa Mon¬ 
ica you made two points. One 
was: (a) you can't stay high all 
the time because when you fin¬ 
ally come down from the high 
you realize that the ordinary 
state of conciousness is one 
with the high state. 

This to me has been the most 
fantastic thing in all my LSD 
experiences. That the moment 
•fcome down is the critical mo¬ 
ment of the whole experience.. 

I suddenly realize that this ev¬ 
eryday world around me is ex¬ 
actly the same thing as the 
world of the beatific vision. 

Now, then, how do you inte¬ 
grate that realization with the 
drop-out ? 

BANNED IN SEATTLE 

LEARY: Now, Seattle, you 

know, we were banned in Seat¬ 
tle. We went up there to talk 
about Menopausal Mentality and 
Drop Out. And at all the cock¬ 
tail parties they said: "What 
does he mean?" Drop Out, Men¬ 
opausal, Menopausal, Drop 
Out ? I would agree to change 
the slogan to "Drop Out, Turn 
On, Drop In. " 

WATTS: Yes, that's always 
been the pattern. You have got 
to go alone into the silence, into 
the isolation, and then come 
back. 

LEARY: It should be better, 
"Drop out, turn on, drop in. " 
GINSBERG: The other one 
sounded prettier. 

LEARY: Yeah, it's too easy, 
and youth should figure that out 
for themselves. 

WATTS: But the thing is, that 
at the moment, it is strongly 
indicated that all the values 
which are creating the distur¬ 
bance, that is to say acquisi¬ 
tive values: that of buying 
things, possessing them, hold¬ 
ing on to property, etc. etc. 
Suddenly this has become of no 
interest to the people who are 
really with it. 

GINSBERG: That's where the 
point of it is really; that there 
is an actual, empirical, cultur¬ 


al change. 

SNYDER: It's not-just in our 
heads. 

WATTS: Now we’ve got to re¬ 
member, that at the same 

' time, and this has to sort of be 
stated fpr the record, there is 
always created an illusion, . 
which is referred to in.the Gos¬ 
pels, ".. .do not pay attention 
to them when they say of the 
Messiah!” Now he is here, now 
he is there, now he is in the 
inner room, now he's in/ you 
know, some little secret soci¬ 
ety that's going on, something 
special. ALL is the special 
thing. 

UPAYA 

First of all it seems to be 
what some group has got that's 
out beyond you. But really, 
that's the donkey's carrot, you 
know, tied to a.collar, dangling 
in front of him. 

You'll never get it because 
you have it. Really, you have 
the thing that is where it's at 
in your self all the time, only 
it always looks as if it's out 
there; some group has got it. 

But the thing is that the wise 
group of people who are in the 
know, these people who know 
that you have it yourself, in 
you, you don't have to go to 
East Village, to the Haight - 
Ashbury, to anywhere, Big 
Sur, etc. It's with you all the 
time. 

But the group that indicates 
that it's in us, will seem to the 
others, as if they had it out 
there and they'll become be¬ 
guiled and interested. This is 
what is called in Buddhism, 
UPAYA, skillful means, a kind 
of trickery, (laughter) 

LEARY: It's no question that 
we're suffering less, because 
we're striving less and that 
can't be underestimated in en¬ 
ergy power. Anyone who came 
to the Be-In can see we're suf¬ 
fering less. 

SNYDER: And you're suffering 
less if you learn how to accept 
suffering. 

LEARY: When we're sitting 
around this table, we are suf¬ 
fering less. 

WATTS: The thing that was so 
fascinating about the Be-In was 
that I... not having been able to 
be there, and having just read 
about it in the press.. .was that 
everybody was baffled as to 
what it was all about. 


LEARY: No, just the press 
were. 

A NEED OF NONSENSE 

WATTS: There must be some¬ 
thing going on in every healthy 
culture which is, in a way', non¬ 
sense. If a culture cannot af¬ 
ford an area in itself where 
pure nonsense happens, and 
where it is not practical, it has 
no objectives, it was for no 
reason whatsoever... then this 
culture is dead. 

Because, after all, God is 
the most useless being in the 
universe. 

But that God, you know, is 
in it's own existence, reality. 
The nature of reality is use¬ 
less, it is not useful FOR some¬ 
thing else, it is not a. means to 
an end, it is not somethingthat, 
when you look at it, you could 
say "So what?" Because it's 
IT! 

LEARY: I want to put in a. plug 
for the old teaching. 

WATTS: What do you think I've 
been talking about, Tim? 
LEARY: You take these old 
things about the Bible and all 
the old prayers and just turn 
them in, instead of out, the 
mistake is always that.. .they 
have taken the internal fears 
of... "have no graven images 
before thee. " That means don't 
get hung up on .plastic plates. 
"Our Father who art in Hea- 

WATTS: Don't get hung up on 
THAT Father bit... 

LEARY: All the fathers and 
and mother, you know: "Hail 
Mary full of grace. " That's all 
it is, all the mothers, all the 
fathers. Great! As long as 
you center it inside. 

Almost every prayer that has 
lasted more than two genera¬ 
tions, cellular and mythic, 
works, if you address it within. 
WATTS: In other words, when 
you get to the point in life when 
you realize that you're as stu¬ 
pid as your own grandfather, 
and therefore he' no longer 
impresses you and you 
come at last to realize that 
you're out there just the same 
way he was. 

SNYDER: My grandfather was 
an -I. W. W. and he played a sil¬ 
ver flute. 

LEARY: I think it's important 


is where it's at, you know. 

This is where it's at, and ev¬ 
erybody is playing this game, 
you know, and they'll end up 
playing like YEAOOW on the 
mark and suddenly they realize 
that that's not where it's at. 

So many people today are on 
the other side. Let's go out in 
the Haight-Ashbury and see 
what's happening over there be¬ 
cause maybe something's hap¬ 
pening ! 

SNYDER: Instead of the empha¬ 
sis on the dropping out, and I 









to know who everyone's grand¬ 
father was. Your grandfather 
was a"wobblie." 

SNYDER: He was a wobblie, a 
homesteader, and he played a 
silver flute and sat in a black 
leather chair with a white mus¬ 
tache. 

WATTS: My grandfather was 
private secretary to the Lord 
Mayor of London. 

LEARY: Who is your grand¬ 
father? 

GINSBERG: He was a black- 
hatted man with a black beard 
who came from Russia and 
walked down steps in Newark 
and said his prayers every day. 
WATTS: Tim, who was your 
grandfather ? 

LEARY: Oh, he crawled out of 
a sludgy pool and learned how 
to breathe without gills. 

WATTS: Oh God, I have ano¬ 
ther grandfather come to think 
of it. (laughter) 

On my mother's side he was 
a bibliologer and I have, I don't 
know where they are now, they 
have disappeared,, but I have 
wooden boxes full of all the 
books of the Bible in separate 
volumes carefully annotated, 
careful handwriting. 

So we only missed one gen¬ 
eration there. 

SNYDER: It's just like the In¬ 
dians. Like grandfathers and 
the American Indians have their 
hair long and they follow the 
tribal ways. 

The fathers have their hair 
cut short, they're Christians 
and they drive pick ups. The 
children are growing their long 
and they're joining the Native 
American Church. 

WATTS: They are? In what 
numbers ? 

SNYDER: In pretty significant 
numbers. 

GINSBERG: Larry Bird used to 
be alone among the Pueblos. 
SNYDER: I don't think he really 
is. I think the kids who are se¬ 
venteen, eighteen now are going 
to be long hairs. And that's the 
difference in Indians, whether 
they're long hairs or short 
hairs. 

GINSBERG: What's Leary's 
grandfather? . 

LEARY: My grandfather was a 
watchmaker who had a nervous 
house with about 40 people liv¬ 
ing in it and he lived on the third 
floor in a room filled with books, 
(laughter) 


GINSBERG: What city? 
LEARY: Springfield, Mass. 


LEARY: I have to leave now, 
and I want to m ake one motion, 
that we act upon every idea that 
was expressed tonight (laughter! 
GINSBERG: You were very 
clear tonight. Very clear. I 
would say a little... funky... at 
moments, (laughter) but for 
practical suggestions, and for 
definition of drop out... 

LEARY: What were you tonight, 
Allen? 

GINSBERG: The majesty of the 
law! (laughter) ... just sitting 
here listening, and sort of re¬ 
reflecting my experiences in 
Berkeley. 

LEARY: Yes, you've been very 
influenced by your tum-on ses¬ 
sion with Mario Savio. In addi¬ 
tion to you turning him on, he 
turned YOU on... And you’re 
concerned about him. 

GINSBERG: Well, I sought him 

LEARY: Yes, but still he turned 
you on, and you're concerned 
about him... and we consider 
him a tremendous energy center 
for good in this country, and 
that we want him to move along 
with us, dropping out, turning 
on, tuning in and dropping out 
and dropping in and turning on. 
But he's got to keep turning on. 
GINSBERG: Well, turn on to 
drugs necessarily? To mari¬ 
juana or LSD? 

LEARY: I mean get out of his 
game... 

GINSBERG: He IS... He lives 
without a telephone. He's less 
GAMED than any of us. 

And wondering whether the 
Haight-Ashbury people would 
survive because he's facingjail. 
As many are facing jail in the 
Haight-Ashbury, many are also 
facing jail there in Berkeley. 
LEARY: Well, I'll give one 
message of reassurance to him: 

If anything will survive in the 
whole world, it's going to be 
Haight-Ashbury, because Haight- 
Ashbury's got two billion years 
behind it. I worry about Clark 
Kerr and Governor Reagan and 
the Berkeley activists, but one 
thing will survive, and it's 
what is going on... 

GINSBERG: But there's some 
big weird fascist stomp-out, 
which is what he thinks about. 
SNYDER: Yeah, but Tim is 
right. Weird fascist stomp- 


outs only last for a few genera¬ 
tions. 

GINSBERG: Now wait a minute! 
SNYDER: Well, sometimes they 
last for a millenium. 

WATTS: I suppose many people 
who are now in jail on charges 
of pot smoking and so on, will 
in a later age be regarded as 
martyrs and saints. 

LEARY: Let's get away from 
martyrs; that's a messy game. 
WATTS: Wait a minute... Aren't 
you playing that game ? 

LEARY: No. 

SNYDER: Oh come on, Tim... 
GINSBERG: That's a really 
good question. That's beautiful. 
Aren't you playing the martyr 
game? 

LEARY: What! Don’t you 
think I'm happier... 

GINSBERG: It's whispered in 
all the urinals of Cornell that 
you're playing the martyr game, 
(laughter) 

WATTS: Oh, you can be a hap¬ 
py martyr! But I do think that 
there may well be, in times to 
come, a second Saint Timothy. 
And I feel honored that you're 
with us this evening. 

LEARY: We're writing our new 
myth. .. and we have to, in our 
sessions, relive the Christ 
thing, the Buddha thing, the 
Krishna thing... 

WATTS: I know we do, right.. . 
LEARY: We are creating a new 
myth, and we won't have saints. 
WATTS: But we do it, every¬ 
body in his own way discovers 
the immemorial truth which has 
been handed down, and that's 
the only way you can get it. 

Because you can't imitate it 
... you can only discover it out 
of your own thing, and by doing 
your own stuff you keep repeat¬ 
ing the eternal pattern. This 
probably is the sort of situation 
we have. 

LEARY; The seed-carrying 
soft body should not be embed¬ 
ded in. steel, it does no one 
good, and I have no intention of 
going to jail, and I won't go to 
jail. No one should go to jail. 

And I'm not going to provide 
any kind of model for people to 
go to jail for spiritual purposes. 
WATTS: Well, that's gutsy; I 
like that (laughs). 

LEARY: That's cellular! 

Shanti, shanti. 

WATTS: Shanti, shanti. 

CxS 



























































































SAN FRANCISCO’S GRATEFUL DEAD: 

Bob Weir, Pigpen, Bill The Drummer, 
Jerry (“Captain Trips”) Garcia, and Phil Lesh 


-.ahaa JimTAna bodbidmaht hab 

•jsmrmna 9dT Ilia ,nsqgiq ,ii 9 W do8 
riz9J Iiil*X bns ,6bi£D ("zqiiT ni£lqs3“) y;n9l 


W9d gninioM br.ofl nsbloO 9riT 
I boowoIgniM woH .W* 0 ”® b9UmilnU oT) 

29lllfl 99 J filoiV ®?c J 9I " nwoa no tl 1698 

uo-oii liia loorisZ 9lttiJ 'ninioM 

J** •»»* »*» b!03 

xmS awa'S,m w?j “™!a blioW 9rit Jo qoT no 'niJliZ 

nol b69d luJ9tsia 9riT lew JJuq msoiD 


























































UN EXPUR 











[£&\ 

: otct JfrMt (eZ(p-(*5SH 



Cover photo Paul Kagan 


POSTER ARTISTS and PHOTO¬ 
GRAPHERS WANTED to work 
with new Underground publishers/ 
pro motors/distributors. We are 
preparing a series of psychedelic, 
erotic, spiritual, and Love 
graphic arts products for national 
distribution to hip Underground 
shops. Our vision is to help 
create a world community of 
Love and Joyful- Wisdom, Now!, 
and to earn a living doing what 
turns us on. Communicate your 
ideas, artwork, photos, writings, 
etc., by mail or in person (call 
first) to: 

THE POWERS OF LOVE 

2056 Emerson- St., Berkeley, 

415 848-7515. 'Our motto: 

"TURN O N THE WORLD" 
Wolfman Mojo Dope Poster, su¬ 
per size, send $1, name, address, 
and zip to Zeidler & Zeidler, ltd., 
Dept. O. P., 1611 S. Western Ave., 
LA, Calif. 90006 Also receive 
2 big catalo gs loaded with goodies. 
Wanted: tape recordings of 
poetry read ings 826-1255 
Telegraph A venue: April 9th 
Taurus Moving Service, one ton 
van, furniture moving and small 
funerals. 66 1-9767 
Female vocalist interested in 
singing with folk-rock group con¬ 
tact 527-0914 or write D. F. at 
601 Vista M ont, Berkeley 



Stroboscopes rented & built. Light 
shows, Rick Meyer 841-5594 


4 / 






























































mm 

■- ■ ■ 


V- 


} M\f^ 




















The undersigned residents and shopkeepers hereby petition that Haight Streetbe 
d vehicle traffic on Saturdays and Sundays, from Stanyan Street to Masonic 

During the past weeks the sidewalks have become increasingly overcrowded. Ve¬ 
hicle traffic has slowed down to an average speed of 3 to 5 miles per hour -- slower 
than walking speed. Under these circumstances vehicle flow can hardly be worsened 
by street closing, and-the present pedestrian crowding can be eliminated. 

Vehicular traffic can be directed east and west on Waller and Page Streets. People 
who wish to shop gaze, stroll and experience on Haight Street can park in Kezar 
Stadium parking lot and other available street parking in the area. 

We.also note that this would cost the city less than its present response to this 
situation, which has involved as many as 150 police in crowd control and "riot 
control"-activities without solving the problem. 


NAME 


ADDRESS 









































mpm 















