UNCLASSIFIED 
AD  NUMBER 

_ AD323701 _ 

_ CLASSIEICATION  CHANGES 

TO:  unclassified 

FROM:  confidential 

LIMITATION  CHANGES 

TO: 

Approved  for  public  release,  distribution 
unlimited 


FROM: 

Distribution  authorized  to  U.S.  Gov't, 
agencies  only;  Administrative/Operational 
Use;  May  1961.  Other  requests  shall  be 
referred  to  US  Army  Chemical  Research  and 
Development  Labs,  Army  Chemical  Center, 
MD. 


_ AUTHORITY _ 

Army  Edgewood  Arsenal  notice  dtd  17  Sep 
1975;  Army  Edgewood  Arsenal  notice  dtd  17 
Sep  1975 


THIS  PAGE  IS  UNCLASSIEIED 


UNCLASSIFIED 


AD  NUMBER 

AD323701 

CLASSIEICATION  CHANGES 

TO 

confidential 

EROM 

secret 

AUTHORITY 

30  Jun 

1973  per  DoDD  5200.10  document 

marking 

THIS  PAGE  IS  UNCLASSIEIED 


REPRODUCTION  QUALITY  NOTICE 


This  document  is  the  best  quality  avaiiabie.  The  copy  furnished 
to  OTIC  contained  pages  that  may  have  the  following  quality 
problems: 

•  Pages  smaller  or  larger  than  normal. 

•  Pages  with  background  color  or  light  colored  printing. 

•  Pages  with  small  type  or  poor  printing;  and  or 

•  Pages  with  continuous  tone  material  or  color 
photographs. 

Due  to  various  output  media  avaiiabie  these  conditions  may  or 
may  not  cause  poor  legibility  in  the  microfiche  or  hardcopy  output 
you  receive. 


I  I  If  this  block  is  checkeo.  the  copy  furnished  to  OTIC 
contained  pages  with  color  printing,  that  when  reproduced  in 
Black  and  White,  may  change  detail  of  the  original  copy. 


NOTICE;  When  government  or  other  dravings,  speci¬ 
fications  or  other  data  are  used  for  any  purpose 
other  than  in  connection  vith  a  definitely  related 
government  procurement  operation,  the  U.  S. 
Government  thereby  incurs  no  responsibility,  nor  any 
obligation  v^at soever;  and  the  fact  that  the  Govern¬ 
ment  may  have  formulated,  furnished,  or  in  any  vay 
supplied  the  said  drawings,  specifications,  or  other 
data  is  not  to  be  regarded  by  implication  or  other¬ 
wise  as  in  any  manner  licensing  the  holder  or  any 
other  person  or  corporation,  or  conveying  any  rights 
or  permission  to  manufacture,  use  or  sell  any 
patented  invention  that  may  in  any  vay  be  related 
thereto. 


NOTICE; 

y* 

TECS  DOCUMENT  CONTAINS  INEORMATION 
AFFECTING  THE  NATIONAL  DEFENSE  OF 
THE  UNITED  STATES  WITHEN  THE  MEAN¬ 
ING  OF  THE  ESPIONAGE  LAWS,  TITLE  l8, 
U.S.C.,  SECTIONS  793  and  79^.  THE 
TRANSMISSION  OR  THE  REVELATION  OF 
ITS  CONTENTS  IN  ANY  MANNER  TO  AN 
UNAUTHORIZED  PERSON  IS  PROHIBITED 


BY  LAW 


o 


(Si 


U.  $.  Anir 

Chtnicoi  Rtstqrch  aid  Davtlapaait  Laboralorits 
Tfchilcal  Rtport 


y 


o 


CO 


Docinait  coisiits  of-— -pa|t(s) 

- 

w/Copies  1  thru  9  of  Abstract  Card 


June  1961 


ARMY  CHIMICAL  CENTER,  MD. 


Ktl 


A  8  T  I  A 

!  .-  '  •  .  ' — >-a  .*«• 

r')  M!  ^ 

JiJN  lyg? 


liras 


15 

■  !  i  • 


DOWNGRADED  AT  12  YEAR  INTERVALS; 

NOT  AUTOMATICALLY  DECLASSIFIED. 

DOD  DIR  5200.10  cRM-p,b-«.s.6i 


< 


June  1961 


CROLR  3074 


CLINICAL  INVESTIGATION  OF  EA  1729  (U) 


by 


Van  M.  Sim 


Clinical  Research  Division 


Recommending  Approval: 


DOUGLAS  LINDSEyI 
Colonel,  MC  ' 

Director  of  Medical  Research 


Approved: 


S.  D.  SILVER 
Scientific  Director 


U.  S.  ARMY 

Chemical  Corps  Research  and  Development  Command 
CHEMICAL  RESEARCH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  LABORATORIES 
Army  Chemical  Center,  Maryland 


UNCLASSIFIED 


(U) 


FOREWORD 


The  work  described  in  this  report  was  authorized  under  Project 
No.  4C08-02-022,  Medical  Aspects  of  Chemical  Warfare  (U).  The  work  was 
started  in  1955  and  completed  in' I960. 

Acknowledgments 

The  author  wishes  to  make  it  clear  that  the  ^studies  reported  in 
this  document  represent  the  work  of  many  individuals,  both  within  these 
Laboratories  and  under,  contract  .  A  number  of  the  studies  described  have  been 
reported  in  the  open  literature,  but  several  are  being  reported  here  for  the 
first  time.  Particular  acknowledgment  is  made  of  the  collaborative  efforts  of 
Capt.  Joseph  R.  Bertino,  Capt.  Duane  Collier,  Capt.  Leslie  E.  Geiger,  and 
Dr.  Gerald  Klee  in  the  studies  on  dose-response  effects;  the  work  of 
Capt.  Ernest  R.  Clovis  in  planning,  coordinating,  and  evaluating  many  of  the 
demonstrations;  and  the  work  of  Dr.  Kazuo  K.  Kimura,  Dr.  Alvin  I.  Goodman, 
and  Dr,  Bernard  J.  Clark,  who  conducted  many  of  the  experiments  reported. 
The  author  also  wishes  to  thank  Mrs.  Marion  P.  Royston  for  her  assistance 
in  compiling  this  report. 


Notices 

This  document  contains  information  affecting  the  national  defense 
of  the  United  States  within  the  meaning  of  the  Espionage  Laws,  Title  18, 

U.  S,  C.  ,  sections  793  and  794,  The  transmission  or  the  revelation  of  its 
contents  in  any  manner  to  an  unauthorized  person  is  prohibited  by  law. 

Reproduction  of  this  document  in  whole  or  part  is  proliibited 
except  with  the  permission  of  the  issuing  office;  however,  ASTIA  io 

authorized  to  reproduce  the  document  for  U,  S.  Governmental  purposes. 

/ 

Disposition 

When  this  document  has  served  its  purpose,  DESTROY  it  in 
accordance  with  paragraph  28  of  AR  380-5.  DO  NOT  return  the  document  to 
U.  S,  Army  Chemical  Research  and  Development  Laboratories. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


SECRET 


(S)  digest 

£A  1729  (lysergic  acid  diethylamide,  LSDZS)  has  been  studied 
extensively  in  animals  and  in  humans  as  a  possible  incapacitating  CW 
compound.  Clinical,  physiological,  and  psychiatric  studies  have  been 
conducted. 


From  the  standpoint  uf  biological  effectiveness,  EA  1729 
incapacitates  man  at  doses  as  low  as  1  fig/kg,  the  degree  of  incapacitation 
increasing  with  the  dose.  Its  effects;  endure  for  periods  ranging  from  6  to  24 
hours.  There  is  a  very, wide  margin  of  safety  between  the  incapacitating  and 
lethal  doses. 


SECRET 


3 


UNCLASSIFIED 


CONTENTS 

-  -- 

I.  INTRODUCTION . 5 

II.  HUMAN  STUDIES  . .  6 

III.  ANIMAL  STUDIES . 31 

IV.  ANALOGS  AND  HOMOLOGS  OF  EA  1729  .  37 

V.  ANTIDOTAL  OR  BLOCKING  AGENTS .  37 

VI.  DISCUSSION .  40 

VII.  CONCLUSIONS . 45 

LITERATURE  CITED .  47 

APPENDIX .  49 


UNCLASSIFIED 


4 


SECRET 


(S)  CLINICAL.  INVESTIGATION  OF  EA  1729  (U) 

I.  (5)  INTRODUCTION. 

(S)  The  ability  of  EA  1729  (lysergic  acid  diethylamide,  LSD25)  to 

produce  aberrant  mental  behavior  in  humans  came  to  the  attention  of  the 
U.  S.  Army  Chemical  Corps  about  1947,  and  this  material  has  been  one  of 
the  most  promising  CW  incapacitating  compounds  since  that  time.  It  is  the 
most  potent  of  the  incapacitating  agents  studied  to  date  and  has  the  veryimpor- 
tant  attribute  of  a  large  Safety. margin  betweenthe  incapacitating  and  lethal  doses. 

(U)  The  objectives  of  the  project  under  which  the  reported  work  was 

carried  out  are: 

1.  To  supply  fundamental  knowledge  concerning  the  nature  of  the 
mechanism  and  sites  of  action  in  man  of  CW  agents  and  of  prophylactic  and 
therapeutic  drugs. 

2.  On  the  basis  of  this  information,  to  suggest  the  development 
of  novel  or  more  effective  agents,  as  well  as  to  develop  diagnostic,  protective, 
antidotal,  and  therapeutic  devices  and  procedures  applicable  to  poisoning  by 
such  compounds. 

(U)  A  research  and  development  program  on  agents  that  temporarily 

incapacitate  but  do  not  kill  requires  a  more  complex  structure  of  research 
than  is  necessary  for  a  program  on  lethal  agents.  Quantitating  the  lethality  of 
a  compound  does  not  require  the  extensive  knowledge  of  the  physiological  and 
pharmacological  effects  of  the  material  that  is  required  when  dealing  with  an 
incapacitating  compound,  especially  one  that  produces  effects  on  the  mind.  It 
has  therefore  been  necessary  to  extend  the  program  of  these  Laboratories  to 
include  studies  that  will  yield  the  more  detailed  information  on  incapacitating 
agents  required  to  meet  the  program  objectives. 

(C)  Because  of  its  profound  effect  on  the  mental  processes  of  man, 

EA  1729  is  of  interest  to  investigators  in  many  parts  of  the  world.  It  has  been 
used  extensively  to  produce  experimental  model  psychoses  that  sometimes 
mimic  the  acute  schizophrenic  patient.  The  survey  of  open  publications 
continues,  keeping  the  Laboratories  cognizant  of  the  work  being  done  and 
permitting  an  economy  of  effort.  These  Laboratories  have  restricted  studies 
to  those  questions  that  would  probably  not  be  considered  b /■  private  research 
because  they  are  especially  applicable  to  the  search  for  and  evaluation  of 
CW  agents  and  the  treatment  of  casualties  therefrom. 


SECRET 


5 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(U)  Since  the  establishment  of  the  Medical  Research  Volunteer  Program 

in  1955,  numerous  studies  in  volunteers  have  yielded  sufficient  data  to  delineate 
essentially  the  physiological  and  psychological  effects  of  this  material  in  man. 
Dose-response  relationships  also  have  been  determined,  and  the  effectiveness 
of  a  number  of  antidotal  and  blocking  agents  luis  been  evaluated. 

(C)  The  effect  of  EA  1729  on  the  ability  of  small  groups  of  individuals 

to  participate  in  activities  that  require  group  cooperation  has  been  assessed. 
These  demonstrations  were  followed  by  field  tests  designed  to*  measure  this 
agent's  disorganizing  and  disrupting  influence  on  a  disciplined  military  unit. 

(U)  An  extensive  and  systematic  investigation  of  the  n^ervous  system  of 

lower  animals  has  been  undertaken  as  a  step  toward  arriving  at  a  more  complete 
understanding  of  the  mechanism  and  site  of  action  of  psychotomimetic  agents  in 
man.  The  continuing  need  for  improved  methods  of  recognizing  potent 
psychochemical  agents  in  animals,  in  order  to  permit  the  effectual  and 
expeditious  evaluation  of  the  large  number  of  compounds  that  the  Chemical  Corps 
must  screen,  motivated  many  of  the  animal  studies  reported. 

(C)  The  potency  of  several  analogs  and  homologs  of  EA  1729  has  been 

studied  to  determine  whether  they  merit  consideration  as  CW  incapacitating 
agents. 

(U)  The  data  reported  fall  into  two  categories: 

1.  Work  that  has  been  done  in  these  Laboratories  or  performed 
in  cooperation  with  other  military  organizations  which  is  being  reported  for 
the  first  time. 

2.  Work  in  universities  by  contractors,  which  may  have  been 
reported  in  the  open  literature,  as  a  classified  contractor's  report,  or  in  a 
collaborative  study  at  this  facility. 

II.  (C):  HUMAN  STUDIES. 

1  2  4 

A.  (C)  Clinical,  Physiological,  and  Psychiatric  Studies.  '  ’ 

(C)  A  conservative  estimate  is  that  approximately  3,  000  doses  of 

EA  17  29  have  been  given  to  some  1, 500  individuals  either  in  clinical  studies 
at  Army  Chemical  Center,  in  group  demonstrations  and  exercises  conducted 
at  other  military  installations,  or  in  contract  programs  at  the  University  of 
Maryland  Psychiatric  Institute;  Tulane  University,  Department  of  Neurology 
and  Psychiatry;  New  York  Psychiatric  Institute;  and  University  of  Washington 
Medical  School,  Department  of  Pharmacology.  These  studies  indicated  that 

CONFIDENTIAL 


6 


CONFIDENTIAL 


the  effects  elicited  by  EA  1729  increase  more  or  less  proportionately  to  the 
dosage,  up  to  2/jig/kg.  Above  this  dose,  there  was  no  clear-cut  relationship 
between  dose  and  response.  Subjects  have  had  very  distinct  effects  from  only 
25  jitg(total  dose),  but  they  were  relatively  mild  compared  with  those  produced 
by  higher  doses.  Most  subjects  received  total  doses  of  approximately  . 

70  to  150  fig.  At  this  dose  range,  the  majority  of  men  had  marked  effects. 

After  considerable  numbers  of  clinical  trials,  it  was  found  that,  for  field 
demonstration  purposes,  total  doses  of  100  to  150  fig  (without  strict  regard  to 
body  weight)  were  sufficient  to  cause  incapacitation. 

(C)  The  general  physiological  effects  of  EA  1729  are  mild,  consisting 

of  pupillary  dilatation  and  a  slight  increase  in  blood  pressure  and  pulse  rate. 
Nausea  and  dizziness  and  an  increase  or  a  decrease  of  appetite  are  also  reported 
by  some  subjects.  The  only  consistent  neurological  change  noted  was  an 
increase  in  deep  tendon  reflexes,  such  as  knee,  ankle,  wrist,  and  elbow 
hyperreflexia.  The  major  and  most  consistent  physiological  effect  was 
disturbance  of  visual  perception,  evidenced  by  distortion  of  shapes  and  objects, 
and,  subjectively,  by  hallucinations  of  colors  and  geometrical  patterns.  The 
latter  were  more  pronounced  in  darkened  rooms. 

(U)  Psychological  changes  were,  consistent  and  profound.  Almost  all 

the  subjects  had  difficulty  in  concentrating,  making  decisions,  and 
communicating.  The  particular  type  of  observed  reaction  depended  on  the 
total  personality  of  the  individual.  The  broad  term  "personality"  in  this  sense 
means  the  evaluation  of  psychological  and  psychometric  testing,  as  well  as  the 
psychiatric  evaluation  of  the  individual's  ability  to  cope  with  his  social 
environment,  either  in  military  or  in  civilian  life. 

(U)  The  observed  reactions  ranged  from  tenseness  to  panic  and  from 

friendliness  to  (rarely)  verbal  manifestation  of  aggressiveness  without  physical 
action. 


1,  (C)  Dose-Response  Effects. 

(C)  In  an  experiment  to  determine  the  dose-response  effects  of  EA  1729, 

18  volunteers  were  given  a  different  dose  of  the  drug  at  weekly  intervals  for  a 
totpl  of  3  weeks.  The  oral  dosages  used  were  I,  2,  4,  8,  and  16  fig/kg  body 
weight,  dissolved  in  distilled  water  and  administered  on  a  double- blind  basis. 
Even  at  the  highest  concentrations  used,  the  drug  was  found  to  be  odorless, 
colorless,  and  tasteless. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


7 


CONFIDENTIAL 


a.  (C)  General  Effects. 

« 

With  increasing  doses,  the  onset  of  signs  and  symptoms  became 
more  rapid  and  more  severe.  At  the  16  pg/kg  dose  level,  symptoms  were 
noted  5  to  10  minutes  after  ingestion.  Severe  psychic  effects  lasted  10  to  24 
hours,  and,  in  a  few  instances,  24  to  48  hours.  Tingling,  numbness, 
lightheadedness,  and  "woozy"  feelings  were  reported  by  the  majority  of 
subjects.  Impaired  time  sense  and  slurring  of  speech  were  frequent  results. 

b.  (C)  Other  Effects. 

(1)  (C)  Neurological  Changes. 

At  the  4  /ig/kg  dose  level,  difficulty  in  walking  was  evident.  Some 
volunteers  preferred  not  to  leave  their  beds,  but  two  subjects  at  this  dose 
level  exhibited  extreme  restlessness  and  paced  up  and  down  with  little  difficulty 
in  walking.  Confusion  and  severe  perceptual  disturbance  seemed  to  be 
responsible  for  the  impairment  of  locomotion.  Tests  of  cerebellar  function 
gave  normal  results;  only  slight  incoordination  was  seen.  Mutism  was  observed 
in  two  volunteers  at  the  higher  dose  levels,  and  at  16  Mg/kg  one  volunteer 
became  totally  uncommunicative  for  4  hours. 

Increased  deep  tendon  reflexes  were  noted  in  some  subjects  at  the 
1  and  2  fig/kg  dose,  and  all  subjects  given  doses  of  4,  8,  and  16  ng/kg  exhibited 
hyperreflexia.  Above  the  4  gg/kg  level,  there  seemed  to  be  no  correlation 
between  the  degree  of  hyperreflexia  and  dose. 

(2)  (C)  Circulatory  Systemic  Changes. 

Generally,  it  was  found  that  blood  pressure  increased  with  the  drug 
dose.  Systolic  and  diastolic  pressure  rises  were  maximal  2  to  3  hours  after 
a  dose  of  1  to  2  fig/kg.  When  the  dose  of  EA  17  29  was  4  jig/kg  or  higher,  the 
maximum  blood  pressure  was  observed  30  minutes  after  drug  administration. 

In  almost  every  subject,  blood  pressure  returned  to  control  levels  within 
6  hours  postingestion.  Blood  pressure  effects  were  most  pronounced  when 
anxiety,  restlessness,  and  panic  were  predominant  symptoms.  However, 
regardless  of  the  psychological  reaction,  a  blood  pressure  rise  was  noted  in 
every  subject  given  doses  of  4,  8,  and  16  jig/kg.  Figure  1  illustrates  the 
effects  on  blood  pressure  of  3  doses  of  EA  1729.  Due  to  the  apprehension  and 
hyperactivity  of  this  subject,  50  lig/kg  of  Thorazine  was  given  intramuscularly 
and  was  followed  by  a  rather  rapid  decrease  of  both  systolic  and  diastolic 
p, eo3ure.  Figure  2  indicates  the  change  in  blood  pressure  in  an  individual 
receiving  dost  n  of  4,  8,  and  1  6 /ig/kg  of  EA  1729  at  1-week  intervals.  It 
would  appear  that  the  difference  in  these  two  subject  a  {figures  1  and  2)  is  that 

CONFIDENTIAL 


8 


CONFIDENTIAL 


M 


u 


CONFIDENTIAL 

9 


BLOOD  PRESSURE  CHANGES  RESULTING  FROM  THREE  DOSES  OF  EA  1729 
AND  AFTER  TREATMENT  WITH  THORAZINE  (U) 

(Subject  C.  A. ) 


CONFIDENTIAL 


10 


BLOOD  PRESSURE  CHANGES  RESULTING  FROM  THREE  DOSES  OF  EA  1729  (U) 

(Subject  A.  B.  ) 


CONFIDENTIAL 

in  the  hyperreactor  both  the  diastolic  and  systolic  pressures  rose  rather 
rapidly  in  the  first  30  minutes  whereas  in  the  subject  described  by  figure  Z, 
the  systolic  pressure  rose  without  a  concomitant  marked  increase  in  the 
diastolic  pressure.  Acceleration  of  the  pulse  rate  was  observed  in  all 
volunteers  given  more  than  Z  {xg/kg,  and  pulse  rate  changes  paralleled  blood 
pressure  increases.  No  instances  of  abnormal  rhythm  or  extrasystoles  were 
recorded. 


(3)  (U)  Pupillary  Size  Changes. 

Pupillary  dilatation  could  not  be  measured  accurately  because  of 
the  difficulty  in  getting  the  subjects  to  cooperate,  to  move  into  a  room  with 
constant  illumination.  Estimates  of  pupillary  size  were  made  on  the  basis  of  0 
for  no  change  to  4^  for  maximum  dilatation.  Subjects  given  4  ixg/kg  had  an 
average  of  S'*”  change  in  pupil  size,  while  higher  doses  produced  no  apparent 
increase  of  this  near-maximum  dilatation.  Light  reflex  and  accommodation 
were  normal.  Table  1  summarizes  these  changes. 

(C)  TABLE  1 

CHANGES  IN  PUPILLARY  SIZE  RESULTING  FROM  EA  1729  (U) 


Number  of 
subjects 

Dose  EA  1729 

Average  increase  in 
pupillary  size>:< 

6 

Pg/kg 

1 

1+  :(0-?.+  ) 

6 

2 

2+  (1+-2+) 

18 

4 

3+  (2+-3+) 

12 

8 

3+  (2+.-4+) 

! 

11 

16 

3+  (3+-4+) 

*  (U)  0  =  no  change 

4+’  =  maximum  dilatation 


CONFIDENTIAL 


11 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(4)  (C)  Nausea  and  Vomiting. 

At  low  doses  of  EA  1729>  nausea  was  usually  transient;  at  higher 
doses,  it  became  more  persistent.  No  subject  given  a  dose  of  1  and  2  pg/kg 
vomited.  Both  the  severity  and  frequency  of  nausea  and  vomiting  increased 
with  dosage,  as  seen  in  table  2. 


(C)  TABLE  2 

FREQUENCY  OF  NAUSEA  AND  VOMITING  AFTER 
ADMINISTRATION  OF  EA  17^9:  {U) 


Number  of 
subjects 

Dose  EA  1729 

Nausea 

Vomiting 

6 

/ig/kg 

1 

2/6 

0/6 

6 

2 

3/6 

0/6 

IS 

4 

10/18 

1/18 

12 

8 

10/12 

4/12 

11 

16 

8/11 

5/11 

(5)  (C)  Respiratory  Changes. 

Changes  in  respiration  were  not  evident  at  low  doses  of  EA  1729. 

At  4  pg/kg,  one  subject  developed  hyperventilation,  respiratory  alkalosis, 
and  a  positive  Chvostek  sign.  Four  of  the  12  volunteers  who  received  8  pg/kg 
and  4  of  the  11  volunteers  who  received  16  pg/kg  also  exhibited  hyperventilation 
with  signs  of  alkalosis.  Carbon  dioxide  levels  in  blood,  taken  3  hours  after 
drug  administration,  were  determined  in  fa  subjects  at  various  dose  levels, 
and  the  results  are  summarized  in  table  3. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


12 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  TABL.E  3 

CO2  LEVELS  BEFORE  AND  AFTER  ADMINISTRATION  OF  EA  1729  (U) 


Subject 

Dose 

Hyperventilation 

CO2  content 
(  venous  whole  blood) 

Predrug 

Postdrug 

Mg/kg 

vol  % 

J.G. 

4 

+ 

63.  7 

56.  3 

R.  R. 

4 

- 

62.  1 

61. 0 

R.  T. 

i 

8 

- 

51.  3 

55.5 

W.  L. 

8 

- 

60.  4 

47.  6 

D.  B. 

16 

- 

48.  9 

51. 9 

R.  B. 

16 

+ 

59.  3 

41. 7 

(6)  (U)  Electrocardiogram  (ECG)  Findings. 

(U)  egg's  were  taken  on  12  subjects,  both  under  control  conditions 

and  at  the 'height  of  the  drug  reaction  (table  4  summarizes  the  data  obtained). 

The  most  significant  change  in  the  ECG  was  a  prolongation  of  the  P-R  interval, 
but  this  bore  no  relationship  to  the  dose  of  drug  ingested.  There  does,  however, 
appear  to  be  some  relationship  between  P-R  changes  and  the  occurrence  of 
nausea. 

(U)  In  all  except  one  case,  prolongation  of  the  P-R  interval  at  a  given 

dose  was  followed  by  an  equal  or  longer  P-R  interval  at  the  higher  doses. 

(U)  There  were  several  other  ECG  findings,  but  these  were  inconsistent. 

The  findings  which  were  not  consistent  were  changes  in  voltage  and  small  but 
insignificant  changes  in  S-T  segment  patterns. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


13 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  TABLE  4 

PROLONGATION  OF  P-R  INTERVAL  AFTER 
ADMINISTRATION  OF  EA  1729  :(ll) 


Prolongation  of  P-R  interval  (.  01  sec) 


Dose  EA  1729 

-1 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Mg/kg 

4 

0 

2 

2 

2 

2 

0 

8 

0 

1 

4 

2 

1, 

0 

16  ; 

1 

1 

1 

2 

1 

Total 

1 

4 

7 

7 

5 

0 

Nausea 

0 

1 

5 

4 

5 

0 

(7)  (C)  Electroencephalogram  (EEG)  Findings. 

EEC's  were  recorded  on  two  subjects  given  a  16  /xg/kg  dose  of 
EA  1729.  The  recordings  taken  at  the  height  of  the  EA  1729  reaction  were 
difficult  to  interpret  because  of  excessive  muscular  activity  over  the  frontal 
and  temporal  leads.  No  reliability  was  placed  on  these  records.  Other  studies 
by  contractors  have  covered  the  EEG  findings. 

(8)  (C)  Blood  Chemistry  Changes. 

Electrolyte  studies  included  calcium,  magnesium,  chlorides, 
sodium,  and  potassium  determinations  and  showed  no  significant  change  after 
administration  of  EA  1729.  Blood  glucose  determinations  of  six  volunteers 
given  doses  of  4,  8,  and  16  Atg/kg  showed  a  slight  rise  2  hours  after  drug 
ingestion. 


(9)  (U)  Temperature  Changes. 


Skin  and  body  temperatures  were  also  measured  on  these  subjects. 

In  general,  body  temperatures  fell  slightly  (0.  5°  to  1 . 0®C)  at  doses  of  8  and  Ifi  ^xg/^. . 


CONFIDENTIAL 


14 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(10)  (U)  In  a  omnia. 

Insomnia,  a  common  complaint  of  the  volunteers,  could  be  related 
to  the  dose  of  drug  administered.  Subjects  with  insomnia  were  effectively 
treated  with  100  mg  secobarbital, 

2.  (C)  Correlation  of  Oral  and  Aerosol  Doses. 

In  a  test  to  determine  the  comparative  effectiveness  of  inhalation 
and  oral  doses  of  EA  1729,  four  volunteers  were  first  exposed  to  aerosols  of 
the  agent  and  then  administered  oral  doses  2  weeks  to  1  month  later.  Aerosol 
total  doses  (particle  size  MMD  =  ca  2.  4ji)  ranged  from  11. 8  ^g  to  67.  7  jug; 
oral  total  doses  were  70  and  72  jug.  It  was  found  that  the  agent  produced 
similar  reactions  by  both  routes,  results  differing  only  in  rapidity  of  onset. 
After  oral  doses,  onset  occurred  within  30  to  40  minutes;  after  inhalation 
doses,  onset  occurred  within  15  to  25  minutes. 

3.  (C)  Effect  on  Human  Tracking  Ability  and  Discriminability 

of  Radar  Symbols. 

Several  tests  were  conducted  to  evaluate"  the  effects  of  EA  1729 
on  the  performance  of  military  tasks  that  require  quick,  accurate,  visual 
discrimination. 

In  one  test  of  1 1  volunteers,  5  served  as  controls  and  6  received 
oral  doses  of  150  jug  of  EA  1729  2  hours  before  testing.  Differently  shaped 
symbols  were  presented  to  the  subjects  on  a  Planned-Position-Indicator  Radar 
Display,  which  is  integral  to  the  Antiaircraft  Fire  Control  System.  One  symbol 
was  designated  the  target  symbol  during  each  display,  and  subjects  were 
required  to  recognize  and  count  the  frequency  with  which  the  target  symbol 
appeared,  among  varying  numbers  of  three  different  symbols.  A  total  of 
24  symbols  appeared  on  each  display;  the  frequency  of  the  target  symbol  was 
varied  from  2  to  4.  Statistical  comparison  of  scores  for  the  control  group 
versus  the  drugged  group  indicated  that  the  mean  scanning  time  and  number  of 
trials  during  which  an  error  occurred  increased  significantly  for  the 
drugged  group  at  the  5%  and  0.  1%  level,  respectively  (table  5).  In  the  , 
control  group,  the  mean  scanning  time  was  2.  74  seconds;  in  the  drugged  group, 
it  was  4,  53  seconds.  In  the  control  group,  the  total  number  of  errors  was  15; 
in  the  drugged  group,  it  was  57. 

In  another  test,  16  volunteers  participated  in  a  study  to  evaluate 
the  effects  of  3  dose  levels  of  EA  1729  on  tracking  proficiency.  The  tracking 
device  used  responded  to  steering  much  like  a  tracked  vehicle,  and  the 


CONFIDENTIAL 


15 


CONFIDENTIAL 


accuracy  with  which  operators  tracked  a  moving  target  of  light  was  scored 
automatically  by  photo  cells  and  counters.  For  example,  when  the  subject 
deviated  1”  from  perfect  tracking,  3  or  4  photo  cells  were  stimulated.  Each 
subject  had  five  15 -minute  trials  per  day  for  4  days.  On  the  second  and 
fourth  days,  the  men  were  given  placebo.  On  the  third  day,  2  men  were 
given  an  oral  dose  of  50  jig  of  EA  1729,  b  received  100  pg,  and  8  received 
150  ^g.  Only  those  subjects  who  received  150  fig  showed  a  significant  decrement 
in  their  tracking  ability.  The  minimum  decrement  in  performance  for  the 
150-ptg-dose  group  was  twice  as  large  as  the  maximum  decrement  in  the  per¬ 
formance  of  the  100-fxg-dose  group.  The  maximum  decrement  in  the  150-/ig-dose 
group  was  nearly  six  times  greater  than  the  maximum  decrement  of  any  opera¬ 
tor  in  the  lOO-ng-dose  group. 


(Ci)  TABLE  5 

INDIVIDUAL.  AND  GROUP  SCORES  FOR  SCANNING  TIME  AND  NUMBER 
OF  ERRORS  COMMITTED  IN  CONTROL  AND  DRUGGED  GROUPS; ( U ) 


Performance 

criteria 

Control-group 

subjects 

Drugged-group' 

.  subjects* 

B 

B 

C 

D 

E 

F 

G 

H 

I 

! 

j 

Mean  scanning  time  (in  sec) 

3.  06 

2.  75 

3.40 

1. 94 

2.  75 

5.  27 

6..  1.0 

3..  74 

4.58 

4.68 

Group  mean  scanning  time 

2.  74 

sec 

1.  53  B 

lec 

Total  number  of  errors 
committed 

2 

5 

4 

3 

1 

28 

6 

6 

8 

9 

Number  of  trials  during 
which  one  or  mors  errors 
occurred 

2 

4 

4 

3 

1 

10 

1 - 

6 

1 

6 

4 

1 

7 

*  Dose  =  150  jig 


CONFIDENTIAL 


16 


CONFIDENTIAL 


4.  (C)  Effects  on  Humans  as  Determined  by  Self-Rating  Teats. 

A  group  of  ten  volunteers  was  given  100  fxg  of  EA  1729  by  mouth. 
These  subjects  rated  themselves  by  the  Clyde  Mood  Scale***  four  times:  once 
before  taking  the  drug,  and  again  at  1,  2,  and  6  hours  after  taking  the  drug. 
Table  6  lists  their  responses  to  the  six  general  factors  into  which  the 
133  adjectives  were  categorized.  The  ''jittery"  factor  is  the  one  that  most 
clearly  differentiates  the  subjects'  drug  and  nondrug  self-descriptions. 

"Clear  thinking"  is  depressed  at  1  and  2  hours  aifter  drug,  but  by  6  hours 
subjects  have  largely  recovered. 

(C)  TABLE  6 

MEDIAN  FACTOR  SCORES  ON  THE  CLYDE  MOOD  SCALE  (U) 


Factor 

Predrug 

Postdrug 

l-hr 

2-hr 

6-hr 

Friendly 

50.  5 

47a/ 

44.  5 

44. 5b/ 

Energetic 

53 

50 

49 

49_c/ 

Clear-  thinking 

55.5 

49a/ 

40b/ 

51.5 

Aggressive 

45 

42 

43 

40 

Jittery 

42 

54c/ 

68b/ 

51a/ 

Depressed 

42 

44 

48£/ 

43 

a/  0.  02,  least  significant  difference 
b/  0.  01,  least  significant  difference 
c/  0.  05,  least  significant  difference 


NOTE;  Ten  subjects  received  100  ug  of  KA.  1729  by  mouth.  Significance 
of  the  difference  .between  each  postdrug  test  value  and  the  predrug 
value  for  that  factor  was  tested  by  the  Wilcoxon  Signed  Ranks  Test, 

>!t  (U)  The  Clyde  Mood  Scale  is  a  self-rating  test  consisting  of  133  cards,  each 
bearing  an  adjective  that  is  descriptive  of  feeling.  The  subject  sorts 
these  cards  into  four  groups,  according  to  the  degree  to  which  he  feels 
a  given  adjective  describes  him  at  the  moment.  The  degrees  are: 

"not  at  all,  "  "a  little,  "  "quite  a  bit,  "  and  "extremely.  " 

CONFIDENTIAL 


17 


CONFIDENTIAL 


5.  (C)  Effects  on  Personality  Factors. 

•  • 

Paranoid  reactions  to  EA  1729  have  frequently  been  noted  in 
normal  subjects.  In  most  cases  this  reaction  can  be  related  to  definite 
personality  factors  of  the  subject.  It  was  found  that  the  amount  of  drug 
and  the  environmental  conditions  may  influence  the  degree  of  EA  1729 
reaction,  but  the  predrug  personality  appeared  to  be  the  determining 
variable  in  paranoid  reactions. 

6.  (C)  Effect  on  Body  Image. 

Figures  drawn  by  18  college  graduates, .  when  they  were  ex¬ 
periencing  the  effects  elicited  by  ingestion  of  72  pg  of  EA  1729,  showed 
less  attention  to  detail,  a  greater  number  and  higher  severity  of  distortions, 
and  a  more  disturbed  line  quality  than  figures  drawn  by  the  same  subjects 
when  normal.  The  figures  drawn  under  drug  also  tended  to  be  larger  than  the 
control  figures. 

7.  (C)  Effect  on  Intellectual  Functions. 

Sixteen  subjects  were  tested  on  two  forms  of  the  Wechsler  Memory 
Scale  and  Gorham  Proverbs  test  under  a  control  state  and  after  ingesting 
72  ng  of  EA  1729.  Of  the  Wechsler  Memory  test's,  only  the  abilities  to  draw 
geometric  figures  from  memory,  to  reproduce  brief  prose  passages,  to  count 
backward,  to  say  the  alphabet,  and  to  perform  serial  addition  were  adversely 
affected  by  the  drug.  There  was  a  significant  difference  between  performance 
during  the  Gorham  Proverbs  test  under  control  and  drug  conditions, 

8.  (C)  Effect  on  Sense  of  Time. 

Twenty-four  subjects  tested  after  ingestion  of  1  or  2  pg/kg  of 
EA  1729  for  any  alteration  in  their  sense  of  time  showed  that  external  events 
are  perceived  as  passing  more  slowly.  This  was  a  fairly  consistent  finding 
in  most  of  the  studies  of  this  drug.  In  an  Air  Force  study,  5  a  comparison  was 
made  of  the  effects  of  isolation  and  the  effects  of  EA  1729.  It  was  found  that 
the  drugged  volunteers  felt  a  loss  of  their  sense  of  time  more  frequently  than 
did  the  undrugged, isolated  volunteers-.  They  also  found  that  a  few  of  the  drugged 
subjects  had  the  sensation  that  time  was  passing  faster  than  usual.  This 
acceleration  of  time  was  never  observed  in  the  studies  performed  in  these 
laboratories;  in  fact,  the  opposite  has  been  true. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


18 


CONFIDENTIAL 


9.  (C)  Effect  on  Selected  Subjective  Reactions. 

(C)  Drugged  subjects  were  tested  for  visual  effects  under  three  oral 

doses  of  EA  1729: 


No.  of  Subjects  Dose 

Mg  , 

10  100 

4  150 

5  200 


Each  subject  was  tested  twice:  once  in  the  normal  state  and  once  at  the  pre¬ 
sumed  peak  of  drug  action  (1-1/2  to  2  hours  after  administration). 

This  testing  included: 


cl.  (C)  Acuity:  Snellen  charts  were  projected  one  line 
at  a  time, with  parallel  aeries,  to  negate  the  effects  of  learning, 

b.  (C)  Manifest  Refraction:  Nearsightedness,  far¬ 
sightedness,  and  astigmatism  were  checked  objectively  with  a  retinoscope 
and  subjectively  with  a  fogging  technique. 

c.  (C)  Muscle  Balance;  With  the  subject  focusing  at  20  feet, 
the  Maddox  rod  was  used;  with  the  subject  focusing  on  a  near  object,  the 

Von  Graph  method  was  used, 

d.  (C)  Color  Discrimination:  A  series  of  44  pseudo- 
isochromatic  plates  was  shown  to  subjects. 

e.  (C)  Depth  Perception:  The  Verhoeff  test  was  use’d  to 
assess  this  function.  The  subject  was  presented  with  three  vertical  bars,  one 
of  which  was  either  nearer  to  him  or  farther  from  him  than  the  other  two.  He 
was  asked  to  state  which  bar  was  out  of  line  for  each  of  a  series  of  such 
presentations.  This  test  permits  the  elimination  of  size  as  a  systematic  cue 
by  varying  size  .independent  of  distance., 

(U)  With  scattered  exceptions,  these  subjects  did  not  revsa’  disturbances 

of  vision.  One  of  the  100  fig  subjects  showed  a  slight  acuity  drop  in  one  eye, 
as  did  two  of  the  150  fig  subjects.  But  at  the  200  fig  dosage,  none  of  the  subjects 
showed  lessened  acuity  except  for  one  subject  who  showed  a  changed  refraction 
under  the  drug  and  failed  one  portion  of  the  color  test. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


19 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(U)  A  probable  reason  for  this  negative  finding  of  visual  effects  is  that 

no  time  limits  were  placed  on  these  tests.  Subjects  took  longer  to  read  a  given 
line  of  the  Snellen  chart  under  drug,  commenting  that  "it  comes  and  goes" 
or  "now  I  see  it;  now  I  don't.  "  It  may  be  that  strict  time  controls  in  the 
visual  tests  should  be  introduced  along  with  other  tests  to  check  on  motivation, 
concentration,  ability  to  communicate,  etc. 

10.  (C)  Effect  on  Associative  Processes  and  on  Learning  and 

Memory. 

From  the  responses  of  25  normal  subjects  to  the  Rapaport  word 
association  test  after  ingestion  of  2  pg  of  EA  1729,  it  can  be  concluded  that 
the  learning  of  simple,  specific,  nonemotional,  verbal  material  presented  to 
the  subjects  orally  is  not  affected  at  this  dose. 

11.  (C)  Effect  on  Funkenstein  Test. 

The  effect  of  EA  1729  on  cardiovascular  changes  resulting  from 
injection  of  epinephrine  and  methacholine  bromide  (Mecholyl  bromide, 
Funkenstein  test)  was  studied  in  14  volunteers.  No  subject  showed  a  liyper-  or 
hyporeactivity  to  methacholine  (as  defined  by  Funkenstein).  The  usual  response 
to  methacholine  is  an  initial  decrease  in  blood  pressure  associa,ted  with  an 
increase  in  heart  rate.  This  is  followed  in  a  short  time  by  a  heart  rate  that  is 
below  control  values.  Two  hours  after  ingestion  of  1 . 5  pg/kg  of  EA  1729,  the 
subcutaneous  injection  of  10  mg  of  methacholine  produced  a  relatively  greater 
drop  in  blood  pressure  and  a  slower  return  to  initial  blood  pressure  levels 
than  in  the  control.  However,  an  analysis  of  covariance  indicated  that  these 
results  were  probably  attributable  to  the  greater  initial  elevation  of  the  blood 
pressure  caused  by  EA  1729. 

Subjects  pretreated  with  EA  1729  had  significantly  smaller 
elevations  of  blood  pressure  (compared  with  their  control  values)  after 
intravenous  administration  of  0.  025  mg  of  epinephrine. 

The  results  suggest  that  the  cardiovascular  mechanisms  that  react 
to  a  hypotensive  stimulus  respond  normally  in  an  EA  17 29- drugged  individual. 
The  smaller  rise  in  blood  pressure  following  administration  of  epinephrine, 
s  ^phough  not  correlated  with  the  higher  initial  blood  pressures  caused  by 
EA  1729,  may  still  reflect  the  higher  level  of  sympathetic  activity  seen 
clinically.  It  appears  that  as  the  initial  level  of  sympathetic  activity  is 
increased  the  magnitude  of  physiological  response,  such  as  that  seen  with 
epinephrine,  is  decreased. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


20 


CONFIDENTIAL 


B.  (C)  Field  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  1729  in  Humans.  . 

(C)  On  17  December  1957,  a  demonstration  was  conducted  primarily 

to  determine  the  problem  of  controlling  a  small  group  influenced  by  EA  1729 
and  also  to  provide  a  filmed  record  of  the  effect  of  the  agent. 

• 

(C)  Nine  soldiers  were  ordered  by  a  typical  Army  drill  sergeant  to 

"fall  in."  The  squad  responded  like  well-trained  soldiers;  the  drill  sergeant's 
commands  were  obeyed  accurately  and  with  precision.  After  the  squad  was 
given  2  fig/kg  of  EA  1729  orally  and  the  undrugged  drill  sergeant  again  ordered 
the  men  to  fall  in,  the  response  was  entirely  different.  The  men  were  euphoric 
and  disorganized;  commands  were  either  disregarded  or  obedience  was 
haphazard  and  indifferent.  In  a  marching  exercise,  the  men  started  fairly  well 
but  soon  began  to  break  ranks  and  straggle  out.  When  a  second  drill  sergeant 
who  was  drugged  was  given  command  of  the  squad,  he  did  not  perform  effec¬ 
tively.  In  fact,  when  an  officer  ordered  him  to  drill  the  squad,  he  responded 
with,  "You  want  'em  drilled?  You  drill  'em!  " 

(C)  On  18  December  1957,  in  another  demonstration,  eight  volunteers 

were  each  given  2  ^ig/kg  of  EA  1729  orally.  This  group,  before  receiving  the 
drug,  had  defeated  another  group  in  a  volleyball  game  by  a  score  of  21-5. 

After  receiving  the  drug,  they  again  defeated  their  undrugged  opponents  21-17. 

It  is  believed  that  one  individual,  an  Army  private  who  demonstrated  exceptional 
leadership,  was  instrumental  in  holding  the  group  together.  When  he  was 
removed  from  the  game,  there  was  a  tendency  for  his  team  to  slacken  play. 

(U)  These  two  demonstrations  indicated  that  individual  reactions  to  this 

agent  are  varied:  a  drugged  group  can  continue  simple  functions,  but  there  is 
reduction  in  their  effectiveness  and  teamwork  is  less  efficient.  ’ 

1.  (C)  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  17  29  to  U.  S.  Army 

Chemical  Corps  School  Personnel. 

(C)  The  Chief  Chemical  Officer;  desires  all  officers  assigned  to  the 

Chemical  Corps  to  be  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  current  standard  agents 
that  the  Corps  has  developed  and  those  experimental  or  research  compounds 
that  show  the  most  promise  of  ultimate  development  into  effective  agent  or 
weapons  systems.  For  this  reason,  several  demonstrations  of  the  effects 
of  EA  1729  were  conducted  at  the  U.  3.  Army  Chemical  Corps  School, 

Fort  McClellan,  Alabama,  in  which  students  and  members  of  the  staff  and 
faculty  participated.  It  was  felt  that  actually  experiencing  the  effects  of 
EA  1729  would  enable  members  of  the  Advanced  Class  to  discuss  more 
intelligently  the  potential  of  the  compound,  recognize  its  symptoms,  and  that 
additional  clinical  data  could  be  gathered  upon  which  to  base  a  determination 
of  the  value  of  EA  1729 

CONFIDENTIAL 


21 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  In  these  demonstrations,  doses  from  100  to  150  /4g/man  were 

administered  orally  to  the  participants,  and  then  the  individuals  engaged  in 
such  activities  as  map  exercises,  target  analysis,  arithmetic  problems, 
bridge  and  blackjack  games.  Some  staff  and  faculty  personnel  attempted  to 
give  platform  presentations  and  to  conduct  seminar-type  discussions.  It 
was  found  that  under  stress,  in  a  platform  presentation  of  familiar  material, 
personnel  were  unable  to  complete  a  lecture  successfully.  In  a  similar  group 
situation,  previously  rehearsed  5 -to- 10-minute  presentations  on  completely 
familiar  subjects,  i.  e.  ,  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  tuberculosis  by  a 
medical  officer,  or  a  concise  description  of  select  problems  of  radioactive 
fal.lout  by  a  trained  radiological  safety  officer,  were  never  completed  by  the 
subjects  under  drug.  The  results  of  the  map-reading  test  taken  by  68  subjects 
are  contained  in  table  7. 

(U)  TABLE  7 

RESULTS  OF  MAP-READING  TEST  (U) 


Day 

Mean  score 

Mean 

difference 

Difference  required  for 

0.  05  confidence  level 

Control 

Experimental 

1 

79.  7 

63..  8 

15.  9’'‘ 

,  11.8 

2 

79.  8 

59-.  8 

20.  0* 

13.  7 

3 

76.5 

56.  7 

19,8^* 

12.  9 

Significant  0.  01  level 


>!”l‘  Significant  0,  05  level 

2.  (C)  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  1729  to  XVIII  Airborne 

Corps,  Fort  Bragg,  North  Carolina. 

(C)  After  enough  experiments  in  individual  and  small  groups  of 

volunteers  had  been  carried  out  to  ascertain  that  large-group  studies  were 
feasible,  arrangements  were  made  by  CG,  USCONARC, to  conduct  a  test 
at  Fort  Biagg,  North  Carolina,  in  September  1958.  Chemical  Corps  personnel 
supplied  the  necessary  medical  support  for  all  test  operations,  but  operational 
evaluation  of  the  tests  was  made  by  members  of  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps. 

All  scoring  was  based  on  standard  artillery  proficiency  tests.  Such  an 
evaluation  allows  some  judgment  to  be  made  of  the  military  effectiveness  of  the 
agent.  All  evaluations  of  test  results  that  appear  in  this  report  were  furnished 
by  the  evaluation  team  of  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps. 

CONFIDENTIAL. 


22 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(U)  Of  the  70  meTxfrom  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps  Artillery  who  volun¬ 

teered  to  compose  the  teams,  11  were  rejected  for  either  psychiatric  or 
medical  reasons.  The  crews  selected  represented  above-average,  skilled 
Army  units,  with  exceptional  morale.  The  tests  were  conducted  in  the  field 
under  anticipated  operating  conditions,  with  only  minor  deviations  from  normal 
procedure  to  insure  the  safety  of  individuals  and  to  allow  for  photographic 
coverage. 

(C)  The  total  dose  of  150  pg/man  of  EA  1729  was  selected  on  the  basis 

of  previous  clinical  experience  as  a  dose  which  would  (1)  produce  measurable 
effects  that  would  endure  for  the  period  of  the  test;  (2)  permit  the  degree  of 
physical  activity  necessary;  and  (3)  not  be  so  severe  as  to  result  in  a  termination 
of  the  test  before  missions  were  accomplished.  Although  several  of  the 
volunteers  received  the  compound  more  than  once  during  the  5 -week  testing 
period,  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  performance  of  these  men  was  improved 
by  previous  drug  experience. 

(C)  A  double- blind  procedure  was  used  on  all  tests;  EA  1729  in  water 

and  plain  water  as  placebo  were  administered  to  the  volunteers. 

(U)  The  criteria  used  for  selecting  the  types  of  teams  to  be  used  in  the 

test  were; 

(U)  a.  Team  missions  should  require  the  collective  efforts  of 

the  individual  team  members  to  produce  results. 

(U)  b.  The  success  or  failure  of  the  accomplishment  of  the 

team  mission  should  have  a  maximum  effect  on  related  operations. 

(U)  c.  Maximum  opportunity  to  supervise  the  safety  of  in¬ 

dividuals  composing  the  team  should  be  possible. 

(U)  Two  of  each  of  the  following  groups  participated  in  the  tests  outlined 

below: 


(1)  (C)  Meteorological  Section, 

The  mission  of  this  section  is  to  furnish  necessary  weather  data*’* 
that  will  affect  artillery  projectiles  or  rockets  in  flight  and  will  furnish 
winds- aloft  data  for  prediction  of  fallout  after  an  atomic  burst. 

*  (C)  Data  obtained  by  this  section  are  disseminated  to  artillery  units  through 
out  the  Corps  sections  and  can  affect  the  firing  accuracy  of  several 
artillery  units. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


23 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  At  0820  on  3  September  1958,  £A  1729  in  water  was  administered 

to  one  of  the  meteorological  sections;  the  other  section  received  placebo. 

Both  sections  were  assigned  the  mission  of  making  weather  balloon. releases 
at  0830,  0930,  and  1030  hours  and  reporting  weather  data  gained  from  the 
releases.  The  section  which  received  placebo  disseminated  completed 
messages  at  0900,  1000,  and  1100  hours.  The  drugged  section  disseminated 
a  completed  message  at  0900  hours,  but*  was  unable  to  produce  any  part 
of  a  message  after  the  next  two  balloon.releases. 

(U)  Identical  results  were  achieved  when  the  same  procedure  was 

followed  on  9  September  1959,  the  only  change  in  the  procedure  being  that 
the  drugged  and  control  sections  were  reversed. 

(C)  The  evaluation  team  of  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps 

concluded  from  this  phase  of  the  test  that  a 
meteorological  section  subjected  to  attack  with 
SA  1729  would  not  be  able  to  fulfill  its  mission. 

(2)  (C)  Survey  Section. 

(C)  The  mission  of  this  section  is  to  furnish  survey  control  data 

needed  by  artillery  units  to  locate  firing  positions  and  targets. 

(U)  On  4  September  1958,  both  survey  sections  were  given  data  for  a 

survey  control  point  and  the  mission  of  extending  this  control  to  another  area. 
Unoer  normal  conditions  successful  accomplishment  of  this  mission  should 
be  achieved  within  2-1/2  hours. 

(C)  Immediately  after  EA  1729  and  placebo  were  administered,  the 

teams  began  survey  operations.  The  drugged  team  required  5  hours 
50  minutes  to  complete  the  task.  The  accuracy  of  the  survey  was  within 
allowable  tolerances  only  because  the  recorder  was  undrugged  and  was 
able  to  assure  that  all  angles  and  taped  distances  were  rechecked  until  he 
was  certain  of  their  accuracy,  ('When  the  test  was  repeated  on  10  September 
and  all  members  of  the  same  section  were  drugged,  the  team  required 
3  hours  40  minutes  to  complete  the  survey,  and  accuracy  was  not  within 
tolerable  limits..}  The  undrugged  (control)  section  completed  its  mission  in 
2  hours  5  minutes,  and  the  xeaults  were  accurate. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


24 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  The  evaluation  team^of  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps 

concluded  that  although  a  survey  team  subjected 
to  attack  with  EA  1729  might  be  able  to  produce 
acceptably  accurate  results,  the  ti:  le  required  for 
completion  of  even  the  simplest  type  of  survey  would 
be  so  great  as  to  make  the  survey  section's  accomplish¬ 
ment  of  its  mission  unsatisfactory. 

(3)  (C)  Fire  Direction  Team. 

(C)  The  mission  of  this  section  is  to  control  battery  or  battalion  firing 

by  converting  information  furnished  by  an  observer  into  commands  for  guns 
to  fire;  to  convert  without  adjustment  data  furnished  by  survey  and  meteorologi 
cal  sections  into  commands  to  deliver  fire  on  targets  when  no  observer  is 
available. 

{Cj  On  16  September  1958,  the  two  fire  direction  teams  were  given  a 

series  of  identical  fire  missions  that  were  typical  of  their  normal  operations. 
An  hour  after  receiving  EA  1729,  the  drugged  team  was  much  slower  in 
processing  fire  commands  than  the  control  section.  Although  the  members  of 
the  drugged  team  were  able  to  perform  the  necessary  computations  for 
delivering  area-type  fire  on  target  with  acceptable  results,  they  could  not  fire 
precision  missions  with  any  degree  of  accuracy,  mainly  because  of  their 
inability  to  concentrate. 

(U)  _  Identical  results  were  obtained  when  the  test  was  repeated  on 

23  September  1958,  the  only  change  in  procedure  being  that  the  drugged  and 
control  teams  were  reversed, 

(C)  The  evaluation  team  of  the  XVIII  Aif  borne  Corps 

concluded  that  an  artillery  fire  direction  team 
would  be  unable  to  perform  its  mission  satisfacto¬ 
rily  while  experiencing  the  effects  of  EA  1729. 

(4)  (C)  40-mm  Antiaircraft  Automatic  Weapons  Gun  Section. 

The  mission  of  this  section  is  to  provide  air  defense  for  forward 
combat  arms  and  to  attack  and  destroy  hostile  targets  on  land  or  water,  as 
required, 

*  (U)  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  recorder  was  not  drugged  in  the 

test  on  which  this  conclusion  is  based.  That  this  would  be  the 
case  in  an  actual  situation  is  not  probable. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


25 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  On  5  September  1958,  the  40-mxn  antiaircraft  automatic  weapons 

gun  sections  were  emplaced  on  a  ridge  which  afforded  a  field  of  fire  in  all 
directions.  Cameras  were  mounted  parallel. to  the  gun  tubes,  and  an  L-19 
aircraft  was  used  as  the  target.  The  tracking  by  the  undrugged  group  was 
smooth  and  continuous,  and  the  gun  camera  film  indicates  this  group  was 
able  to  accomplish  its  mission  of  defense  against  hostile  aircraft.  The 
tracking  by  the  drugged  group  was  jerky  and  not  coordinated;  the  gun  camera 
film  proved  that  the  only  hits  obtained  by  this  group  were  accidental. 

(U)  When  the  test  was  repeated  on  11  September,  with  the  drugged  and 

control  groups  alternated,  similar  results  were  obtained. 

(C)  The  evaluation  team  of  the  XVIII  Airborne  Corps 

concluded  that  a  40-mm  antiaircraft  automatic 
weapons  gun  section  subjected  to  attack  with 
EA  1729  would  be  unable  to  track  an  aircraft 
that  was  using  evasive  tactics  and,  therefore, 
would  not  be  able  to  accomplish  its  mission  of 
furnishing  antiaircraft  protection. 

Over- all  Results 

(C)  The  over-all  results  of  the  tests  conducted  at  Fort  Bragg  (XVIII 

Airborne  Corps)  indicate  that  an  artillery  unit  attacked  with  EA  1729  would 
be  unable  to  deliver  artillery  fire  effectively  in  support  of  ground  operations. 

3.  (C)  Demonstration  at  U,  S,  Army  Special  Warfare  School, 

Fort  Bragg.  North  Carolina. 

On  29  September  1958,  eight  members  of  a  Special  Forces  Group 
stationed  at  Fort  Bragg  were  assigned  guard  posts  and  given  specific  instruc¬ 
tions  for  restricted  access  to  the  area.  Then  they  were  given  a  dose  of 
150  /.tg/man  of  EA  1729  orally.  Six  posts,  manned  by  drugged  subjects,  were 
penetrated  successfully  at  lease  once  and  in  some  cases  several  times  by 
personnel  without  proper  identification.  Two  subjects  did  not  permit 
unauthorized  personnel  to  enter  their  posts.  With  one  exception,  none  of 
the  guards  knowingly  let  an  unauthorized  visitor  pass  through  his  post. 
However,  the  men  were  easily  confused  and  deceived  as  to  what  constituted 
the  correct  identification.  The  one  exception  was  a  subject  who  experienced 
an  extreme  reaction  to  the  drug  and  would  not  remain  on  his  post.  Although 
the  agent  affected  the  men's  sense  of  responsibility  and  duty,  they  also  lost 
physical  control,  were  unable  to  read  the  printing  and  signatures,  and  were 
easily  confused. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


26 


CONFIDENTIAL 


It  was  concluded  by  personnel  of  the  school  that  the  use  of  1729 
in  higher  doses  against  enemy  personnel  would  enable  an  exploiting  force  of 
small  size  to  overcome  the  enemy  force  very  rapidly  and  without  violence. 

On  30  September,  six  subjects  were  given  an  assumed  tactical 
situation  and  told  not  to  divulge  this  information  during  the  course  of  a  sub¬ 
sequent  interrogation.  After  receiving  a  dose  of  150  jKg/man  of  EA  1729 
orally,  three  of  the  men  were  successfully  interrogated.  When  the  test  was 
repeated  on  1  October,  the  six  subjects  ^d  not  show  the  usual  reaction  to  the 
drug,  and  interrogation  was  generally  unsuccessful.  However,  the  men  were 
confused  to  the  extent  that  one  unknowingly  signed  a  confession  of  germ 
warfare . 


A  slightly  higher  dosage  of  EA  1729  would  be  effective  in  enabling 
an  interrogator  of  limited  experience  to  compel  a  subject  to  compromise 
himself  and  sign  documents  which  would  place  his  existence  in  jeopardy  with 
the  enemy. 


4,  (C)  Demonstration  at  Infantry  School,  Fort  Penning, 

Georgia. 

(C)  Forty-one  officer -students  of  the  Infantry  School  at  Fort  Benning 

participated  in  a  test  designed  to  familiarize  combat  arms  groups  with  the 
effects  of  psychochemical  agents.  On  the  morning  of  8  January  I960,  oral 
dosages  of  100  ng,  150  ng,  and  200  fig  of  EA  1729  (the  dosage  increasing  with 
the  weight  of  the  subject)  were  given  in  distilled  water  to  test  subjects. 
Thirty-four  men  actually  received  the  drug;  the  remaining  seven  were 
unaware  that  they  had  received  only  water.  When  in  the  afternoon  the  test 
subjects  were  asked  to  indicate  by  a  show  of  hands  those  who  felt  they  had 
received  little  or  none  of  the  test  material,  only  the  seven  control  subjects 
responded. 

(U)  Comments  written  by  the  volunteers  while  in  the  drugged 

condition  and  after  recovery  revealed  a  variety  of  subjective  responses. 
Visual  perception  hallucinations  were  manifested  by  blurring  of  images, 
and  objects  and  people  changing  to  a  green  or  yellow  color.  For  most,  time 
seemed  to  come  to  a  almost  complete  standstill.  There  was  euphoria, 
inability  to  concentrate,  confusion,  and  an  almost  complete  lack  of  concern 
about  anything. 

(U)  A  basic  arithmetic  test,  designed  for  students  at  the  eighth- 

grade  level,  was  administered  to  the  group  when  under  the  influence  of  the 
drug  and  after  recovery.  When  drugged,  the  group  averaged  a  score  of 


CONFIDENTIAL 


27 


CONFIDENTIAL 


13  out  of  a  possible  100.  After  recovery,  the  class  averaged  a  score  of  89  out 
of  a  possible  100. 

(U)  In  an  English  test,  composed  of  many  uses  of  everyday  English  and 

problems  in  correct -word  selection,  the  class  averaged  a  score  of  55  out  of  a 
possible  136  when  under  the  influence  of  the  drug.  After  recovery,  the  class 
average  was  112  out  of  a  possible  136. 

(U)  Some  of  the  comments  on  the  value  of  the  agent  and  the  demon¬ 

stration  were: 

"No  amount  of  research  on  the  effect  of  a  psychochemical  could 
have  prepared  me  for  the  actual  effect.  " 

"The  impressive  thing  about  the  drug  is  that  so  many  of  the 
normal  students  didn't  detect  anything  particularly  wrong.  This  would  have  a 
tremendous  effect  on  an  executive  officer  who  knew  his  commanding  officer 
wasn't  behaving  in  a  normal  manner  but  who  hesitated  to  relieve  him  and 
assume  command,  " 

"I  had  lost  all  sense  of  urgency  as  to  the  situation  and  duties  that 
I  was  performing.  During  this  period  I  never  felt  that  I  was  incapacitated  or 
that  I  was  unable  to  perform  what  I  desired  to  do.  If  the  decision  to  request 
someone  to  take  over  my  responsibilities  and  duties  was  to  be  mine,  then  it 
would  never  be  accomplished." 

"I  do  not  think  that  any  time  during  the  day  I  was  physically  or 
mentally  able  to  perform  in  my  present  MOS.  " 

"I  can  never  forget  the  effects  the  agent  had  on  myself  or  other 
persoimel.  The  thought  of  what  could  be  done  to  an  entire  command  or 
population  is  beyond  comprehension.  " 

5.  (C)  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  1729  on  Polygraph 

Examination. 

(C)  Fourteen  subjects  took  part  in  a  test  (August  1958)  to  determine 

whether  an  individiial  experiencing  the  effects  of  EA  1729  is  capable  of 
persisting  in  deliberate  falsehoods. 

(U)  During  the  control  session,  each  subject  was  told  to  give  a  false 

answer  deliberately  to  one  question  of  a  series  asked  him  while  he  was 
iwdergoing  a  polygraph  examination.  The  purpose  of  this  control  session 

CONFIDENTIAL 


28 


CONFIDENTIAL 


was  to  determine  if  each  subject's  response  to  a  lie  could  be  picked  out  of  the 
polygram. 

(C)  In  the  drug  sessions,  each  subject  was  also  instructed  to  falsify 

one  answer  deliberately,  and  the  machine  record  of  the  individual's  reaction 
was  read  to  see  if  the  operator  could  detect  the  falsehood  and  select  this  area 
as  one  potentially  valuable  for  further  questioning.  Subjects  received  a  total 
oral  dose  of  100  /xg  to  150  jitg  of  EA  1729. 

(U)  .  It  was  observed  that: 

(C)  While  under  the  influence  of  £A  1729,  subjects  are  capable  of 

falsification  and  persistence  in  a  previously  contrived  falsehood. 

(U)  Falsification  while  under  the  drug  appears  to  be  limited  to  a  "yes" 

or  "no"  type  of  response;  the  mental  state  of  subjects  appears  to  render  them 
incapable  of  a  complex  false  response. 

(C)  Polygraph  examination  of  subjects  experiencing  EA  1729  effects 

indicates  a  more  effective  reaction  to  unexpected  key  questions  than  when  the 
same  or  similar  questions  are  put  to  the  same  subjects  under  normal 
conditions. 

(C)  The  stress  of  the  polygraph  examination  appears  to  be  increased 

for  subjects  under  the  influence  of  the  drug. 

(C)  In  the  spring  of  I960,  polygraph  testing  was  again  undertaken  to 

determine  whether  it  is  more  advantageous  to  polygraph  a  subject  while  under 
the  influence  of  EA  1729  than  in  his  normal  state.  . 

(U)  It  was  observed  that: 

(C)  In  spite  of  some  strong  evidence  pointing  in  that  direction,  it  is 

impossible  to  state  definitely  that  it  is  more  advantageous  to  polygraph  a 
subject  while  under  the  influence  of  EA  1729  than  in  his  normal  state.  The 
principal  limitation  to  a  distinct  advantage  appears  to  be  the  inability  of  the 
polygraph  operator  to  interpret  the  machine's  charted  graphs  rather  than 
the  state  of  the  subjf  -“^t  under  examination.  The  subject's  condition  under 
the  drug's  influence  appears  to  be  such  that  he  is  less  capable  of  persisting 
in  a  precontrived  falsehood  because  of  mental  confusion  between  the  truth 
and  a  deliberately  distorted  response. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


29 


CONFIDENTIAL 


6.  (C)  Demotiatration  of  Effects  of  EA  1 729  in  a  Contrived 

Social  Situation. 

(C)  In  two  tests  (August  1958  and  September  1959)«  subjects  were  a 

part  of  a  contrived  social  situation  (cocktail  party).  In  the  test  conducted  in 
August  1958,  6  of  the  13  "naive"  (inexperienced  with  the  drug)  subjects  were 
surreptitiously  administered  100  jug  to  150  jug  of  1729  in  their  first  drink 
under  double-blind  conditions.  In  the  test  in  September  1959,  12  (10  naive, 

2  esiperienced)  of  20  subjects  received  the  drug.  Otherwise,  the  conditions 
of  the  two  tests  were  similar.  The  monitors  assigned  to  each  subject 
observed  their  behavior  throughout  the  evening. 

(U)  It  was  specifically  concluded  that: 

(C)  It  is  possible  to  administer  EA  1729  surreptitiously  in  alcohol. 

Most  naive  subjects  are  unaware  that  they  are  under  the  influence  of  a  drug; 
however,  there  is  a  possibility  that  certain  subjects,  by  comparing  their 
drug  reaction  with  theijr  known  reaction  to  alcohol,  may  relate  their  strange 
feeling  to  drugs. 

(U)  Subjects  are  reluctant  to  withdraw  from  the  psychological  support 

afforded  by  their  remaining  in  a  group  situation. 

(U)  An  uninformed  observer  cannot  tell  that  a  drugged  individual's 

beliavior  is  not  attributable  to  alcohol.  An  observer  who  is  familiar  with  the 
external  physical  symptoms  of  the  drug's  reaction  is  not  able  to  state  with 
certainty  in  all  cases  that  an  individual  is  drugged. 

7,  (C)  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  1729  When  Subjects 

are  in  Isolation. 

(C)  Eleven  subjects  participated  in  a  test  (2  to  21  November  1958) 

of  the  combined  effects  of  a  150  (ig  dose  of  EA  1729  and  deprivation  of 
external  sensory  stimuli  (by  confinement  in  an  isolation  chamber)  to 
determine  whether  the  combined  effects  of  isolation  and  drug  are  different 
from  those  elicited  by  drug  alone. 

(C)  Seven  volunteers  had  prior  experience  with  EA  1729  (sophisticated); 

three  had  no  experience  with  the  drug  (naive):  and  one  subject,  although  he  had 
never  taken  EA  1729,  had  observed  individuals  who  were  under  the  influence  of 
the  drug. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


30 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(U)  The  three  naive  and  three  of  the  sophisticated  subjects  fled  the 

•  unlocked  isolation  chamber  before  the  arbitrary  time  limit  of  4  hours  (which 
the  subjects  did  not  know  had  been  set). 

(U)  All  of'the  sophisticated  subjects  reported  that  the  combination  of 

the  drug  and  isolation  generally  intensified  the  over -all  effects  elicited  by  the 
drug  alone.  It  would  appear  that  naive  subjects  were  more  strongly  affected. 

8.  (C)  Demonstration  of  Effects  of  EA  17Z9  on  Retentiveness 

and  Recall. 

(C)  A  program  for  testing  retentiveness  and  recall  under  the  effects 

of  EA  1729  was  conducted  (3  November  T959  to  17  December  1959). 

(U)  Twelve  subjects  were  verbally  given  a  set  of  detailed  instructions; 

they  were  permitted  to  take  notes,  ask  questions,  and  repeat  instructions  over 
a  period  of  1  hour.  Three  hours  later,  after  oral  drug  administration,  the 
subjects  were  recalled  and  asked  to  repeat  the  given  instructions  to  the 
monitor.  The  degree  of  completeness  and  accuracy  of  the  subjects'  recall  of 
instructions  was  scored  by  the  monitors  according  to  preset  weighted  values. 

(C)  It  was  apparent  that  individual  ability  to  absorb,  retain  for  a 

period  not  exceeding  2  hours,  and  verbally  communicate  a  body  of  new  data  of 
simple,  logical,  but  detailed  content  was  impaired  by  EA  1729. 

(U)  Similar  ability  in  respect  to  a  body  of  previously  learned  data  of 

the  same  type  is  variably  affected.  Variability  appears  to  be  dependent  upon 
the  degree  of  sophistication  of  the  individual  with  regard  to  previous 
experience  with  the  drug.  Impairment  does  not  appear  to  be  related  to 
individual  intelligence,  training,  or  undrugged  experience  in  similar  situations. 

III.  (C)  .  ANIMAL  STUDIES. 

A  (C)  Neurophysiological  Studies. 

(U)  It  is  not  possible  to  restrict  investigations  into  the  problems  of 

pharmacological  psychoses  to  man  because  most  neurophysiological  techniques 
are  not  applicable  to  man.  The  alternative  has  been  selected  of  studying  the 
electrical  activity  of  the  brain  of  animals  and  correlating  new  .  ophysiology  with 
behavior  in  so  far  as  possible. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


31 


CONFIDENTIAL 


1.  (C)  The  Pharmacological  Properties  of  an  Evoked 

Potential  in  the  Midbrain  Reticular  Formation. 

(C)  A  study  of  the  effect  of  EA  1729  on  several  electrophysiological 

properties  of  the  cat  brain  revealed  that  even  in  massive  doses  EA  1729 
failed  to  alter  the  evoked  potentials  in  the  electrocorticogram;  the  evoked 
potentials  in  primary  visual,  auditory,  and  somatic  cortex;  the  direct  response 
of  the  cortex;  the  transcallosal-evoked  potential;  and  the  somatic -evoked 
responses  in  the  thalamus  :ajid  midbrain  reticular  formation.  EA  1729  does 
appear  to  exert  a  definite  effect  on  electrical  activity  of  the  lateral  geniculate 
nucleus,  but  the  dose  required  to  inhibit  the  postsynaptic  potential  in  the  lateral 
geniculate  is  probably  100  times  the  quantity  needed  to  produce  visual 
hallucinations  in  man. 

(C)  There  is  evidence  that  the  process  involved  in  visual  hallucinations 

is  in  some  manner  associated  with  the  lateral  geniculate  nucleus,  and  this 
might  be  evidence  that  the  physiological  effects  of  EA  1729  on  the  lateral 
geniculate  are  of  clinical  significance.  This  would,  however,  require  human 
investigations,  because  hallucinations  are  a  subjective-  phenomenon  and  no 
means  of  detecting  hallucinations  in  animals  is  yet  known.  Also,  paranoia 
and  depersonalization  are  not  applicable  to  the  behavior  of  animals.  No  clinical 
study  to  date  reports  that  EA  1729  has  produced  a  definite  neurological  deficit, 
and  in  only  a  few  reports  has  this  drug  been  related  to  the  organic  toxic  psychoses. 
This  is  of  Importance  in  interpreting  the  lateral  geniculate  effects  of  the  drug  ■ 
since  the  most  logical  clinical  manifestation  of  the  effect  would  be  decreased 
visual  acuity,  which  has  not  been  observed  in  man.  One  hundred'  times  the 
hallucinating  dose  in  man  is  required  to  alter  the  electrical  properties  of  the 
lateral  geniculate  in  cats  and  monkeys,  and  larger  doses  in  monkeys  appear 
to  produce  blindness.  Therefore,  decreased  vision  must  be  considered  a 
toxic  effect  of  the  drug  that  is  unrelated  to  its  hallucinatory  properties. 

2.  (C)  The  Effect  of  EA  1729  on  Spinal  Reflexes  in  Cats.  ^ 

(U)  Zoxazolamine’i*,  reported  to  be  a  centrally  acting  skeletal-muscle 

relaxant,  was  studied  in  cats  to  establish  the  validity  of  the  techniques  of 
studying  inhibition  of  spinal  reflexes.  Electrophysiological  techniques  were 
used  to  analyze  the  mode  of  action  of  zoxazolamine.  Interference  from  possible 
block  at  the  neuromuscular  junction  or  from  interaction  of  afferent  proprio¬ 
ceptive  responses,  inherent  in  techniques  of  muscular  recording,  was  thus 

•  J  -  J 


(U)  A  10%  solution  of  the  drug  dissolved  in  polyethylene  glycol  was 

administered  intravenously.  ’  No  significant  blood  pressure  changes  were 
observed  at  doses  up  to  50  mg/kg.  Discharges  in  ^response  to  afferent-nerve 

*  {U)  Flexin,  2-amino-5-chlorobenzoxazole 

CONFIDENTIAL 


32 


CONFIDENTIAL 


stimulation  were  recorded  from  ventral  roots  in  13  spinal  cats.  The 
monosynaptic  and  first  polysynaptic  spikes  were  unchanged  by  doses  of 
less  than  20  mg/kg.  Above  30  mg/kg,  the  amplitudes  of  these  complexes 
were  reversibly  decreased.  The  later  polysynaptic  spikes  were  reversibly 
inhibited  at  doses  between  15  and  30  mg/kg.  The  dorsal  roots  of  nine  other 
spinal  cats  were  stimulated  with  intense  shocks  to  activate  repetitive 
discharges,  which  were  recorded  from  thin  ventral  root  filaments.  The 
frequency  of  discharge  evoked  by  the  stimulus  and  the  background  activity 
were  found  to  be  depressed  by  intravenous  doses  greater  than  10  mg/kg  or  by 
3  mg/kg  injected  into  the  upper  abdominal  aorta.  The  duration  and  degree  of 
depression  paralleled  the  dosage. 

(C)  After  establishing  the  methodology  and  determining  the  effect  of 

zoxazolamine  on  spinal  reflexes,  the  effects  of  EA  1729  on  spinal  reflexes  of 
cats  were  evaluated  by  measurement  of  changes  in  magnitude  of  the  reflex 
volley  in  ventral  roots  rather  than  by  recording  muscular  contraction.  A 
gastrocnemius,  tibial,  or  peroneal  nerve  was  stimulated  with  single  square 
wave  stimuli  (0.  08  to  3  volts  intensity  and  0.  1  to  0.  4  msec  duration). 

Twenty  preparations  of  dosages  ranging  from  4  to  1,  000  pg/kg  of  EA  1729, 
dissolved  in  sterile  physiological  saline,  were  administered  in  36  injections 
through  a  cephalic  vein.  The  characteristic  modification  of  reflex  activity 
after  administration  of  EA  1729  was  the  increased  height  of  monosynaptic 
response  observed  in  11  out  of  16  injections  of  more  than  200  jug/kg.  Below 
this  dose,  only  1  out  of  20  injections  resulted  in  facilitation.  The  increased 
amplitude  of  the  monosynaptic  spike  became  apparent  within  15  seconds 
after  the  injection  and  lasted  from  4  minutes  to  3  hours.  Maximum 
facilitation  was  observed  with  250  to  300  ng/kg  doses.  Higher  doses 
prolonged  the  duration  of  facilitation,  but  did  not  increase  the  magnitude. 

(C)  This  study  indicates  that  EA  1729  may  modify  spinal  reflexes  in 

a  manner  analogous  to  that  of  epinephrine.  Thus,  EA  1729  may  interact 
with  proposed  adrenaline-like  transmitters. 

3,  (C)  Localization  of  EA  1729  Action  in  the  Brain. 

To  attempt  localization  of  EA  1729  action  in  the  brain,  the  effect 
of  chlorpromazine*,  pentobarbital**,  and  EA  1729  were  studied  in 

*  (U)  2-Chloro-10-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)phenothiazine;  3-chloro-lO- 

(3-dimethylaminopropyl)phenothiazine;  N-(3'dimethylaminopropyl)- 
3-chlorophenothiazine:  Tera^tna;  4560  !<.  P.  ;  Novomazina;  Propa- 
phenin;  Aminazine;  Largaouii;  Ampliactil;  Amplictil;  Megaphen; 
Hibernal;  Promazil;  Thorazine;  Wintermin, 

**  (U)  Sodium  5-ethyl-5-(l-methylbutyl)barbiturate)  Nembutal;  Embutal; 

Pentyl;  Pentone;  pentobarbitone  sodium;  Sopental;  Sagatal;  Sotyl; 
Barpental. 

CONFIDENTIAL 


33 


CONFIDENTIAL 


cats  with  electrodes  permanently  implanted  in  ^e  region  of  the  hypothalamus. 
Upon  electrical  stimulation,  these  animals  constantly  responded  with 
excellent  patterns  of  behavioral  rage.  Although  chlorprbmazine  produced 
definite  behavioral  depression  or  tranqullizatibnA,  the  hypothalamic  rage 
response  was  iittle  affected.  Chlorpromajtine  may  act  by  decreasing  afferent 
input  to  the  hypothalamus,  thereby  reducing  its  activity.  In  contrast  to 
chlor promazine,  pentobarbital  produced  a  marked  decrease  in  the  electrical 
excitability  of  the  hypothalamus.  £A  1729,  in  doses  of  approximately  400  pg/kg, 
produced  a  striking  rage  behavior.  It  has  been  postulated  that  this  rage  re¬ 
action  is  produced  by  activating  some  region,  such  as  the  amygdaloid  nuclei, 
which  then  fires  the  hypothalamus. 

4.  (C)  Sffects  of  EA  1729  on  the  Medullary  Vagal  Center  in  the 

Decerebrate  Cat: 

£A  1729  produced  bradycardia,  a  decrease  in  respiratory  rate, 
and  hypotension  in  the  intact  cat  anesthetized  with  pentobarbital,  but  this  drug 
caused  the  reverse  effects  of  hypertension  and  tachycardia  in  the  spinal 
animal.  An  explanation  advanced  for  this  divergence  of  effects  is  that  in  the 
intact  animal  the  hypertension  and  tachycardia  due  to  peripheral  vasoconstric¬ 
tion  are  masked  by  the  more  potent  effects  of  £A  1729  on  higher  centers. 

Earlier  work  demonstrated  that,  in  the  decerebrate  cat,  ergot  alkaloids 
caused  hypotension  and  bradycardia  via  medullary  vagal  centers.  Therefore, 
the  possible  vagal  effects  of  EA  1729  in  the  decerebrate  cat  were  studied. 

EA  1729  appeared  to  have  a  medullary- stimulating  action.  The 
dose  of  this  compound  which  produced  clear-cut  behavioral  effects  in  the 
unanesthetized  animal  approximates  the  dose  that  produces  a  conduction 
disturbance  in  the  decerebrate  animal  (0.4  mg/kg)  and  is  approximately 
400  times  the  amount  that  produces  behavioral  effects  in  man.  In  both  the 
unanesthetized  and  the  decerebrate  cat,  severe  autonomic  disturbances  occur 
at  this  dose  level,  whereas  in  man  pronounced  changes  in  the  autonomic 
nervous  system  occur  at  a  dose  of/4pg/kg  with  behavioral  changes  occurring 
at  1  pg/kg. 


5.  (C)  Effects  of  Lysergic  Acid  and  its  Derivatives  on 

Rhinencephalic  Electrograms  of  Monkeys. 

iO  Subcortical  paroxysmal  activity  recorded  from  the  septal  and 

hippocampal  regions  in  patients  suffering  from  schizophrenia  have  been 
reported,  and  rhinencephalic  electrograms  of  humans  under  the 
influence  of  EA  1729  and  mescaline  have  been  studied.  It  was  found 


CONFIDENTIAL 


34 


CONFIDENTIAL 


that  paroxysmal  activity  induced  in  the  hippocampal,  amygdaloid,  and  septal 
regions  seemed  to  correlate  with  overt  expressions  of  psychotic  behavior. 
Because  of  this,  6  Macaca  mulatta  monkeys  with  chronically  implanted 
subcortical  electrodes  in  these  rhinencephalic  structures  were  given  lysergic 
acid  derivatives  (d-L,SDE5.  ALD5.2,  MLD41,  L.SM,  DAM,  LPD,  1-LSD25, 

BOL,  and  UML)  with  varying  degrees  of  psychotogenic  effects,  and  the 
monkeys  were  studied  to  determine  whether  this  paroxysmal  hypersynchronous 
activity  in  the  rhinencephalic  region  is  a  spurious  or  an  essential  neuro¬ 
physiological  mechanism  in  individuals  demonstrating  psychotic  behavior  that 
is  either  spontaneous  or  pharmacologically  induced.  If  a  gross  correlation 
could  be  made  between  the  extent  of  hypersynchronous  activity  in  the 
rhinencephalic  structure  and  the  overt  behavior  of  the  Macaca  mulatta  monkey, 
and  then  a  gross,  correlation  could  be  made  between  this  rhinencephalic 
activity  and  the  psychotogenic  effects  in  man  of  various  lysergic  acid  derivatives 
as  established  by  Harris  Isbell,  it  would  offer  a  screening  device  for  both 
psychotogenic  activity  and  tranquilizing  drugs. 

(U)  No  correlation  was  found  between  the  pyretogenic,  antiserotonin, 

or  psychotogenic  effect  as  found  by  Isbell  studying  these  same  drugs  on  humans. 
However,  there  did  appear  to  be  a  good  correlation  between  the  behavioral 
effect  in  monkeys  (which  had  the  appearance  of  either  disturbed  catatonic-like 
or  agitated  behavior)  and  rhinencephalic  paroxysmal  hypersynchronous  activity, 
particularly  in  the  septal  studies.  Mescaline  also  showed  a  similar  correlation. 
Studies  on  a  combination  of  monoamine  oxidase  (MAO)  inhibitor 
(phenylisopropylhydrazine)*  and  5-hydroxytryptophane  (a  serotonin  precursor 
which  crosses  the  blood-brain  barrier),  showed  minimal  effects  in  the 
subcortical  areas  as  well  as  minimal  behavioral  changes. 

(U)  Rhinencephalic  paroxysmal  hypersynchronous  abnormality  appears 

to  be  a  good  indication  of  the  psychotogenic  effects  of  such  drugs. 

B.  (C)  Biochemical  Studies. 

(C)  Studies  on  p-Phenylisopropylhydrazine 
Hydrochloride. 

(C)  If  the  postulate  that  an  increase  in  brain  levels  of  serotonin 

cause  a  response  like  th-'*'  p’*oduced  by  EA  1729  and  5-hydroxytryptophane 
(hyperthermia,  rage-like  reliction,  etc.  ),  it  should  be  possible  to  elicit  these 
responses  by.  preventing  the  destruction  of  the  endogeu-  -  '■’•otonin  formed 


*  (U)  JB516;  l-phenyl-2-hydrazlnopropane)  Catron,  GS  2570. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


35 


CONFIDENTIAL 


by  the  tissues.  Until  recently  the  most  effective  MAO  inhibitor  in  vivo  was 
iproniazid’i’.  Although  iproniazid  potentiates  the  effects  of  serotonin  in 
animals,  it  causes  little  behavioral  change  unless  given  in  near-lethal  doses. 

(U)  Recently  another  hydrazine,  p-phenylisopropylhydrazine  (PIH), 

has  been  discovered  that  is  an  effective  MAO  inhibitor  both  in  vitro  and 
in  vivo.  The  structural  formula  of  this  compound  is: 


CH2  CH  .  •  NH  NH2 

CH3  .  HCl 

(U)  PIH  in  doses  as  small  as  5  to  10  mg/kg  was  effective  in  potenti¬ 

ating  the  actions  of  5-hydroxytryptophane  in  rabbits,  vitro,  PIH  was 
50  times  .as  effective  as  iproniazid  as  an  MAO  inhibitor  when  measured  in 
rat- brain  and  liver  homogenates,  using  serotonin  as  a  substrate. 

(U)  When  rats  were  treated  with  20  mg/kg  of  PIH,  it  was  found  that 

maximum  MAO  inhibition  occurred  on  the  day  of  injection,  but  even  after 
7  days  the  liver  had  regained  only  about  80%  of  its  original  activity. 

(U)  PIH  in  a  dose  of  5  mg /kg  had  no  effect  on  the  rectal  temperatures 

of  rabbits.  However,  if  this  was  followed  by  10  mg/kg  of  5-hydroxy¬ 
tryptophane,  a  marked  rise  in  temperature  resulted,  followed  by  death  of 
the  animal, 

(C)  A  dose  of  ZP  mg/kg  of  PIH  in  cats  produced  such  EA  1729-like 

effects  as  hissing,  pupillary  dilatation,  salivation,  tachypnea,  fear,  and  rage 
reaction.  Peak  activity  occurred  about  8  hours  after  injection  and  effects 
persisted  over  a  period  of  25  hours. 

(U)  The  slow  onset  of  action  suggests  that  PIH  itself  was  not  producing 

the  symptoms,  but  that  the  inhibition  of  MAO  (which  develops  rather  slowly) 
was  responsible  for  them.  The  action  of  PIH  may  be  similar  to  the  action 
of  alkyl  phosphates  against  cholinesterase  enzymes,  causing  an  irreversible 
inhibition  of  MAO  and  causing  the  accumulation  and  toxic  actions  of  the 
endogenously  formed  amines. 


^(U)  Isonicotinic  acid  2-isopropylhydrazine;  1-isonicotinoyl- 2-isopropyl- 
hydrazine;  l-isonicotinyl-2-isopropyJhydrazine;  Marsilid. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


36 


SECRET 


IV.  (S)  ANALOGS  AND  HOMOLOGS  OF  EA  1729. 

(C)  EA  1729.  ALD52  (l-acetyl-lysergic  acid  diethylamide),  and  MLD41 

{l-methyl-lysergic  acid  diethylamide)  were  administered  orally  to  52  non¬ 
hallucinating,  hospitalized,  psychiatric  patients  and  34  normal  volunteers.  A 
comparison  of  the  clinical  effects  produced  by  these  compounds  was  made.  It 
was  found  that  1.  6  times  more  ALD  and  1,  7  times  more  MLD  than  EA  1729 
are  required  to  induce  clinically  apparent  responses  in  both  normal  volunteers 
and  psychiatric  patients.  The  responses  to  ALD  and  MLD  do  not  differ 
significantly  from  those  experienced  when  EA  1729  was  given.  In  contrast  to 
the  EA  1729  subjects,  the  ALD  and  MLD  subjects  did  not  seem  to  be  disturbed 
by  the  drug  reaction  cdfter  the  effects  wore  off.  There  were  no  problems 
presented  in  their  psychotherapy  relating  to  the  study,  as  frequently  happened 
after  an  EA  1729  study.  Many  individuals  in  the  EA  1729  volunteer  group  were 
upset  after  the  study  and  did  not  want  to  repeat  it. 

(S)  The  following  are  the  structural  formulas  of  d-  LSD25,  ALD5  2,  and  MLD41, 


lysergic  acid 
diethylamide 
d-LSD25 
(EA  1729) 


l-acetyl-lysergic  acid 
diethylamide 
ALD52 


1 -methyl-lysergic  acid 
diethylamide 
MLD41 


V.'  (C)  ANTIDOTAL  OR  BLOCKING  AGENTS- 

(C)  Chlor promazine  (Thorazine)  and  dibenzylamine  attenuate  the  acute 

EA  1729  reaction  if  given  in  doses  of  from  10  mg  to  50  mg  by  intramuscular 
injection  or  by  intravenous  infusion  about  30  minutes  before  EA  1729  is 


SECRET 


37 


CONFIDENTIAL 


administered.  Frenquel’^,  Promazine’j<>t<,  Amytal  sodium  ***,  and  a 
combination  of  Amytal  sodium  and  Desoxyn*!"i< have  been  less  effective  in 
attenuating  the  acute  symptoms  of  BA  1729  intoxication. 

(C)  Studies  of  Trilafon  (perphenazine)  as  a  blocking  agent  for  BA  1729 

revealed  that  onset  of  action  is  30  minutes  after  intravenous  administration 
of  Trilafon.  Therefore,  it  is  considered  to  be  inferior  to  chlorpromazine, 
which  acts  within  30  seconds  after  administration. 

(C)  Dibenzyline,  an  adrenolytic  compound  with  adrenergic- blocking 

properties,  was  studied  in  14  volunteers  for  its  effect  on  the  response. to 
BA  1729  and  to  observe  the  psychological  effects  of  dibenzyline  itself.  All 
were  given  0.  16  to  0.51  mg/kg  of  dibenzyline  by  intravenous  infusion.  Bleven 
of  these  volunteers  received  BA  1729  orally  in  doses  of  1  fig/kg  1  hour  after 
receiving  dibenzyline.  When  given  dibenzyline  alone  by  intravenous  infusir?n, 
seven  of  the  volunteers  developed  orthostatic  hypotension  lasting  3  to  4  hours; 
one  volunteer  had  orthostatic  hypotension  that  persisted  for  3  days.  T-wave 
changes  were  noted  in  leads  II,  III,  AVF,  V4  to  V6  of  the  BCG,  which 
reverted  to  normal  the  following  day.  Six  of  the  volunteers  experienced 
impairment  of  concentration.  One  volunteer  reported  a  dream-like  state, 

*  Azacyclonol,  a,  a- diphenyl-4-piperidenemethanol;  a -{4-piperidyl) - 

benzhydrol;  MBR-17;  gamma-pipradol. 

10-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)phenothiazine^;  3276  R.P.;  WY  1094; 

Liranol;  Prazine;  Sparine;  A  145;  Verophen;  Neo-Hibernex; 

Protactyl;  Ampazine;  Esparin. 

5-Ethyl-5-isoamylbarbituric  acid;  barbamyl;  barbamil;  amylo  bar  bitone; 

5 -ethyl -5 -isopentyl barbituric  acid;  Somnal;  Dormytal;  5-isoamyl-5- 
ethyl barbituric  acid;  pentymal;  Isomytal;  Amytal. 

d-Desoxyephedrine  hydrochloride.  d -N,a- dimethylphenethylamine 
hydrochloride;  phenylmethylaminopropane  hydrochloride;  the 
hydrochloride  of  dextro-1 -phenyl- 2-methylaminopropane;  of 
d  r  phenyli  s  opr  opylm  e  thylamine.;  of  d-  N-r  a  -  m  ethyl  -  P  -  pheny  li  s  opr  opylamine; 
of  d-N-methylamphetamine.  Norodin  hydrochloride;  Oesoxyn; 

Pervitin;  Drinalfs;  Desoxyfed;  Methylisomyn;  Methedrine;  Isophen; 
methaniphetamint  -  HCl;  Syndrox;  Dexoval;  Efroxine;  Doxephrin; 
Semoxydrine;  Hiropon;  Soxysympamine ;  Destim;  Gerovit;  Tonedron; 
Adipex;  Amphedroxyn. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


38 


CONFIDENTIAL 


subjective  numbness  of  the  body,  a  loss  of  time  sense,  and  feelings  of 
depersonalization  and  unreality;  Another  volunteer  experienced  considerable 
tension  and  vague  apprehension,  A  third  volunteer  reported  thought  disorder, 
nervousness,  slight  numbness  of  the  body,  and  subjective  slowing  of  the  • 
passage  of  time. 

(C)  All  subjects  who  received  EA  1729  plus  dibenzyline  experienced 

reactions  similar  to  those  with  EA  1729  alone,  except  for  the  mydriasis 
produced  by  EA  1729. 

(C)  BOLil48  (2-bromo-d-lysergic  acid  diethylamide)  has  also  been 

studied  for  its  effect  as  a  prophylactic  compound  against  EA  1729. 

Fifteen  subjects  received  a  daily  oral  dose  of  200  pg  to  300  pg  of  BOLil48  for  3 
to  5  days  prior  to  a  challenging  dose  of  1  to  4  ng/kg  of  EA  1729.  The  men  were 
examined  for  changes  in  blood  pressure,  pulse,  pupillary  size,  reflexes,  and. 
psychic  and  physical  symptoms.  It  was  found  that  pretreatment  with 
200  fig  to  300  fig  of  BOL148  for  several  days  before  and  on  the  day  of  EA  1729 
challenge  prevented  to  a  large  degree  the  psychic  changes  caused  by 
1  to  4  fig/kg  of  EA  1729.  The  physical  signs  and  symptoms  were  also 
diminished  by  BOL148  pretreatment,  and  psychomotor  tests  confirmed  the 
protection  afforded  by  this  compound.  The  BOLil48  did  not  cause  any  consistent 
physiological  or  psychological  changes. 

(C)  Librium  (RO  5-0690)  was  tested  for  its  therapeutic  or  prophylactic 

effects  against  EA  1729.  One  hour  before  receiving  Zfig/kg  of  EA  1729,  three 
volunteers  received  total  doses  of  25,  50,  or  75  mg  of  Librium,  respectively, 
and  one  man  was  given  a  placebo.  In  another  group  of  four  volunteers,  three 
received  total  doses  of  25,  50,  or  75  mg  of  Librium  and  one  received  placebo 
1  hour  after  each  had  received  2  fig/kg  of  EA  1729.  No  modification  of  the 
reaction  to  EA  1729  was  noted  in  those  individuals  who  were  given  Librium. 

The  following  structural  formula  is  that  of  Librium: 


CONFIDENTIAL 


39 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  Because  various  reports  appearing  in  the  literature  stated  that 

substances  such  as  nicotinic  acid  were  effective  £A  1729  antidotes,  some 
vitamins  were  studied.  Nicotinic  acid,  histamine  phosphate  pyridoxine, 
and  thiamine  were  not  found  to  be  effective  antidotes. 

VI.  (C)  DISCUSSION. 

(C)  In  1955,  the  chairman  of  the  Technical  Advisory  Panel  on  Bio¬ 

logical  and  Chemical  Warfare’^  appointed  an  ^  hoc  study  group  (  the  so-called 
Wolff  Committee)  to  examine  the  problem  of  psychochemical  agents ,  with  a 
view  to  advising  the  Chemical  Corps  in  regard  to  its  future  program.  Based 
on  an  intensive  investigation  into  the  preliminary  work  the  Corps  had  completed 
on  psychochemicals  and  a  survey  of  the  open  literature,  the  Wolff  Committee 
recommended  that: 

22 

(C)  1.  A  quasi-realistic  experiment  (outlined  in  detail  in  its  report) 

be  carried  out  with  EA  1729  and  volunteer  unite  as  soon  as  practicable. 

(C)  2.  The  potential  and  promise  of  the  use  of  psychochemical 

agents  in  warfare  be  re-evaluated  upon  completion  of  the  experiment, 

(C)  3.  Increased  efforts  be  placed  on  screening  chemicals  in  the 

lysergic  acid  class  to  find  a  substitute  for  EA  1729. 

(U)  4.  Conditioned  reflex  studies,  using  psychochemical  agents,  be 

made  on  dogs  and  additional  higher  animals  other  than  man. 

(U)  5.  The  dog  or  similar  larger  animals  be  employed  in  long-term 

toxication  and  lethal-dosage  studies. 

(C)  All  of  the  Wolff  Committee's  recommendations  concerning  EA  1729 

have  been  carried  out  and  are  reported  either  in  this  document  or  in  those 
mentioned  in  the  bibliography. 

(C)  EA  1729  was  selected  as  the  model  to  be  used  in  studies  to  provide 

some  conception  of  the  worth  in  warfare  of  materials  that  produce  aberrant 
mental  behavior  because  of  its  known  action  and  because  a  tremendous  amount 
of  work  already  had  been  done  with  this  compound  in  psychiatric  research 
with  humans. 


Office  of  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  Defense,  R&D 


CONFIDENTIAL 


40 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  Among  the  conclusions  of  the  Wolff  Committee  is  the  following; 

The  promise  offered  in  this  field  can  be  determined 
.  only  by  assaying  the  effect  of  psychochemical  agents 

on  military  units.  If  LSD25,  used  as  outlined  in  the 
experiment,  should  fail  to  produce  disorganizing  and 
disrupting  effects  on  the  military  unit,  it  would  be 
evident  that  there  is  no  military  propnise  in  this  field. 

However,  if  the  use  of  these  agents  should,  under  the 
specified  conditions,  produce  serious  disruptions  in 
the  ability  of  the  unit  to  carry  out  its  missions,  then 
it  could  be  reasonably  stated  that  these  agents  offer 
great  promise  for  use  in  military  operations, 

(C)  The  Fort  Bragg  field  test  described  in  this  report  is  comparable  to 

the  experiment  recommended  by  the  Wolff  Committee  and  certainly  proved 
that  EA  1729  will  "produce  serious  disruptions  in  the  ability  of  the  unit  to 
carry  out  its  missions,  "  If  more  realistic  doses  had  been  used  (250  jug  to 
300  jug  total  per  man),  the  men  probably  would  have  been  so  incapacitated  that 
they  would  never  have  attempted  to  perform  their  mission  requirements. 

(G)  From  the  studies  reported  in  this  document,  the  biological  activity 

of  EA  1729  can  be  summarized  as  follows: 

1.  (C)  Effective  Dose  for  Various. R-outes. 

With  respect  to  dose,  EA  1729  is  twice  as  effective  as  the  next 
most  potent  CW  incapacitating  agent  and  psychologically  incapacitates  man  by 
either  the  oral  or  the  inhalation  route.  The  effective  dose  ranges  from 
1  ;ig/kg  upward,  the  degree  of  incapacitation  increasing  with  the  dose. 

There  has  been  insufficient  work  on  the  percutaneous  application 
of  EA  1729  to  permit  a  conclusion  on  its  effectiveness  by  this  route. 

In  all  the  studies  that  have  been  conducted  with  this  material, 
no  human  insensitive  to  EA  1729  has  ever  been  encountered.  Although  it  is 
possible  to  build  up  a  tolerance  to  small  doses  by  taking  the  drug  over  a  period 
of  time,  no  one  has  succeeded  in  developing  a  tolerance  to  doses  of 
300  /ig/man  or  higher. 

2.  (C)  Safety  Factor  Between  Effective  and  Lethal  Doses. 

There  is  a  very  wide  margin  of  safety  between  the  incapacitating 
and  lethal  doses  of  EA  1729.  AJthough  the  LD50  for  man  is  not  known,  no 

CONFIDENTIAL 


41 


CONFIDENTIAL 

untoward  effects  were  seen  in  dose-response  studies  ranging  from  0.  1  MsAs 
to  16  Atg/kg.  No  physiological  effects  have  been  seen  at  the  highest  doses 
given  that  would  lead  one  to  suspect  that  the  limits  of  safety  were  even 
approached. 


3.  (U)  Speed  of  Onset  of  Incapacitation. 

Effects  invariably  were  noted  within  20  to  30  minutes  following 
ingestion,  autonomic  physiological  and  perceptual  changes  appearing  promptly 
and  reaching  a  peak  between  1  and  2  hours.  Onset  of  effects  occurred  within 
15  to  25  minutes  after  inhalation  of  70  pg,  and  «dter  large  oral  doses,  within 
5  to  10  minutes.  Peak  psychotic  incapacitation  usually  developed  by  3  to  4 
hours  after  exposure.  The  predictability  of  the  time  of  onset  and  duration  of 
effects  are  valuable  tactical  assets. 

4.  (U)  Duration  of  Incapacitation'. 

Subjects  were  incapacitated  for  periods  ranging  from  6  to  24  hours, 
depending  on  the  dose  received. 

5.  (C)  Type  of  Action. 

(C)  EA  1729  produces  consistent  and  profound  psychological  changes 

in  man. 

Because  the  drugged  individual  is  extremely  confused, 
making  decisions  and  communicating  thoughts  is  almost 
impossible.  Haphazard  and  indifferent  obedience  to 
commands  is  characteristic.  The  drugged  subject  has 
a  distorted  time  sense;  time  passes  extremely  slowly 
and  experiences  cannot  be  related  to  time.  Vision  is 
impaired,  waves  of  clear  perception  being  followed  by 
distortion.  Because  psychbmotor  coordination  is 
impaired,  the  subject  moves  more  slowly. 

The  appendix  contains  two  excellent  example's  of  individual  subjective  responses 
to  this  compound. 

(U)  The  general  physiologic  effects  are  mild,  being  manifested  in 

pupillary  dilatation,  a  slight  increase  in  blood  pressure  and  pulse  rate,  nausea, 
and  dizziness.  At  higher  doses  than  those  used  in  the  studies  reported  here, 
psychological  changes  would  be  compounded  by  an  increase  in  the  severity  of 
the  physiological  changes. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


42 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  To  the  untrained  eye,  EA  1729  intoxication  is  extremely  difficult 

to  recognize.  Even  when  it  is  detected  and-treated  with  the  compound  of 
choice,  chlorpromazine,  the  acute  EA  1729  effects  are  attenuated,  but  the 
subject  becomes  a  medical  casualty. 

6.  (C)  Degree  of  Incapacitation. 

(C)  Psychological  incapacitation  is  difficult  to  scale  in  degrees.  If  one 

considers  inability  to  accomplish- an  assigned  mission  as  the  criterion  for 
complete  incapacitation,  the  tests  of  EA  1729  with  the  XVIII  Airborne  Group 
at  Fort  Bragg  certainly  qualify  this  compound  as  one  that  produces  complete 
incapacitation,  After  receiving  EA  1729,  the  inability  of  trained  instructors 
to  deliver  lectures  that  they  have  given  time  and  again  indicates  a  drastic 
mental  incapacitation  that  has  far-reaching  possibilities  when  one  considers 
the  effect  on  subordinates  of  the  mental  derangement  of  a  superior. 

(U)  At  total  doses  above  300  ytg,  physical  incapacitation  would  be 

almost  complete. 

7.  (C)  Routes  of  Entry. 

EA  1729  is  effective  by  both  the  oral  and  inhalation  routes  in 
comparable  doses.  The  inhalation  studies  admittedly  are  meager  and  should 
be  continued  to  provide  a  stronger  basis  for  correlating  the  oral  and 
inhalation  effectiveness  of  this  compound. 

8.  (U)  Completeness  of  Recovery. 

Every  one  of  the  exposures  reported  in  this  paper  and  about  which 
the  author  has  personal  knowledge  was  followed  by  complete  recovery, 

9.  (C)  Species  Variation. 

Since  such  extensive  work  in  humans  has  been  done  with  EA  1729, 
it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  species  variation  in  evaluating  the  potential 
effectiveness  of  this  compound. 

10.  (C)  Predictability  of  Military  Effects. 

In  the  one  large  field  test  conducted  with  EA  1729,  every  unit  was 
so  affected  it  could  not  perform  its  assigned  mission.  The  diversity  of  the 
missions  involved  is  significant.  In  this  instance,  a  meteorological  section, 
a  survey  section,  a  fire  direction  team,  and  an  antiaircraft  section  were  all 
rendered  ineffective  by  EA  1729. 

CONFIDENTIAL 


43 


CONFIDENTIAL 


When  interpreting  the  results  of  the  demonstrations  and  field 
test,  one  should  bear  in  mind  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  number  of 
compromises  that  would  not  occur  in  an  actual  combat  situation.  All  these 
compromises  reduced  the  apparent  effectiveness  of  EA  1729  and  did  not  permit 
the  attainment  of  the  full  potential  of  this  agent.  For  instance,  an  artificial 
population  of  subjects  resulted  from  the  elimination  of  those  who  did  not  meet 
the  standards  of  the  physical  and  psychological  examinations.  In  an  actual 
combat  situation,  the  effect  of  this  compound  on  psychologically  unstable 
individuals  (who  would  moat  assuredly  be  found  in  any  large  group)  might  result 
in  utter  chaos. 

Another  artificial  factor  is  that  all  of  the  subjects  knew  they  would 
be  given  some  kind  of  drug  and  that  medical  personnel  would  be  constantly 
monitoring  their  response.  By  materially  decreasing  the  stress  that  would 
normally  accompany  the  development  of  bewildering  psychic  changes,  one  of 
the  most  profound  effects  of  EA  1729,  anxiety, was  considerably  diminished. 
Anxiety  in  the  subjects  under  study  was  also  reduced  because  these  men  had 
the  advantage  of  a  supportive  group  situation. 

The  dosages  used  in  the  field  test  and  demonstrations  (100  pg  to 
150 /ig)  were  not  as  high  as  could  be  expected  in  a  realistic  battlefield 
situation.  They  were  selected  for  their  ability  to  produce  measurable  effects 
without  so  physically  incapacitating  the  men  that  the  experiment  would  be  over 
before  it  began.  Needless  to  say,  higher  doses  would  produce  even  more 
disrupting  results.  In  spite  of  all  these  hindrances  to  achieving  the  full 
potential  of  EA  1729,  every  unit  was  rendered  ineffective. 

Because  there  is  a  fair  percentage  of  hyperreaction  to  EA  1729, 
the  question  may  arise  as  to  whether  people  in  a  battlefield  situation  will  be 
so  affected  that  they  will  become  menacing  fighters.  The  author  feels  that 
should  the  drug  cause  an  individual  to  become  more  aggressive,  it  would  be 
of  no  consequence  because- his  mental  state  would  make  it  very  difficult 
for  him  to  distinguish  the  enemy  from  his  own  forces. 

An  interesting  and  significant  outcome  of  the  studies  with  this 
compound  is  that  all  military  personnel  who  received  EA  1729  were  so 
impressed  by  their  individual  experience  that  they  have  enthusiastically 
advocated  its  military  application. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


44 


SECRET 


VII.  (S)  CONCLUSIONS. 

• 

From  the  standpoint  of  biological  effectiveness,  £A  1729 
incapacitates  man  at  doses  as  low  as  1  Mg/^g>  degree  of  incapacitation 
increasing  with  the  dose.  Its  effects  endure  for  periods  ranging  from 
6  to  24  hours.  There  is  a  very  wide  margin  of  safety  betwfeen  the  incapacitating 
and  lethal  doses. 


SECRET 


45 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  LITERATURE  CITED 

1.  Klee,  G.  ,  Bertino,  J.  R,  ,  and  Sim,  V.  M.  CWLR  2159. 
Clinical  Psychiatric  Studies  of  Subjects  Receiving  EA  1729.'  August  1957. 
UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

2.  Klee,  G.  D.  Summary  of  Psychological,  Physiological,  and 
Biochemical  Studies  Performed  Under  University  of  Maryland  Contracts. 
DA-18-108-CML-5519  and  DA-18-108-CML-6337  in  CooJjeration  With  Army 
Chemical  Center  Personnel.  May  1959.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

3.  Kays,  J.  M.  ,  and  Garrett,  R.  CRDLR  3032.  The  Effect 
of  Three  Dose  Levels  of  EA  1729  Upon  Human  Tracking  Proficiency  (U). 

January  1961.  CONFIDENTIAL  Report. 

4.  Kays,  J.  M.  ,  and  Garrett,  R.  CRDLR  3012.  The  Effect 
of  EA  1729  Upon  Visual  Discrimination  (U).  July  I960.  CONFIDENTIAL 
Report. 

5.  Holt,  R.  R.  ,  and  Goldberger,  L.  WADD  Technical  Report 
60-260.  Research  on  the  Effects  of  Isolation  on  Cognitive  Functioning. 

March  I960.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

6.  Langfitt,  T.  W.  Final  Report.  Contract  DAr  1 8- 1 08-CML- 
64  25.  The  Pharmacological  Properties  of  an  Evoked  Potential  in  the  Midbrain 
Reticular  Formation.  July  1957  to  December  1959.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

7.  Langfitt*  T.  W.  ,  and  Finney,  L.  A.  Effects  of  Lysergic 
Acid  Diethylamide  (LSD)  on  Cortical  Sensory  Evoked  Potentials  in  the  Cat. 

A.  M.  A.  Arch.  Neurol.  1,  258-268  (1959). 

8.  Geiger,  L.  E.  ,  and  Cervoni,  P,  Effect  of  d-I.ysergic  Acid 
Diethylamide  on  Spinal  Reflexes.  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Experimental 
Pathology  and  Medicine  99,  179-181  (1958). 

9.  Geiger,  L.  E.  ,  Cervoni,  P.  ,  and  Monteleone,  F.  Action  of 

Zoxazolamine  Upon  Spinal  Segmental  Reflexes.  J.  P.  E.  T.  123,  164-170 
(1958).  ' 

10.  Maltiz,  S.  Final  Report.  Contract  DA- 1 8-1 08-405- CML-49. 
December  1958.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

11.  Bertino,  J.  R,  ,  Cervoni,  P.  ,  and  Geiger,  Leslie  E.  Medullary 
Vagal  Effects  of  LSD-25  in  the  Decerebrate  Cat,  (In  Publication).  UNCLASSIFIED 
Report. 

CONFIDENTIAL 

47 


Preceding  Page  Blank 


CONFIDENTIAL 


12.  Monroe,  R.  R.  Final  Report.  Contract  DA-I8-IO8-CMJL1- 
5596.  Effects  of  L/sergic  Acid  and  its  Derivatives  on  Rhinencephalic 
Electrograms.  May  1959.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report.  . 

13.  Heath,  R.  G.  (Ed.).  Studies  in  Schizophrenia.  Harvard 
University  Press.  1954. 

14.  Heath,  R.  G.  Correlation  of  Electrical  Recordings  From 
Cortical  and  Subcortical  Regions  of  the  Brain  With  Abnormal  Behavior  in 
Human  Subjects.  Confinia  Neurol.  18,  305  (1958). 

15.  Monroe,  R.  R.,  Heath,  R.  G.,  and  Llewellyn,  R.  C. 
Correlation  of  Rhinencephalic  Electrograms  With  Behavior  ;•  A  Study  on  Humans 
Under  the  Influence  of  LSD  and  Mescaline.  EEG  &  Clin,  Neurophyaiol.  9_, 
623-642  (1957).  ‘ 

16.  Isbell,  H.  Pharmacologic  Properties  and  Psychotogenic 
Effects  of  Some  Lysergic  Acid  Derivatives.  Personal  communication  to 
Sandoz  Laboratories,  Hanover,  N.  J.  UNCLASSIFIED  Communication. 

17.  Horita,  A.  Contract  DA-18-108-CML-6364,  Studies  on 
p-phenylisopropylhydrazine,  a  Potent  and  Long  Acting  Monoamine  Oxidase 
Inhibitor.  Undated.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

18.  Horita,  A.,  and  Parker,  R.  G.  Comparison  of  Monoamine 
Oxidase  Inhibitory  Effects  of  Iproniazid  and  Its  Phenyl  Congener.  Proc.  Soc. 
Exptl.  Biol.,  N.  Y.  99,  617-619  (1958). 

19.  Wilkens,  B.  Contract  DA- 18- 108-405-CML-49.  Clinical 
Response  to  Two  New  K  Agents.  Undated.  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

20.  Goodman,  A.  I.,  and  Clark,  B.  J.  The  Effect  of  BOL- 148 
on  the  Action  of  LSD- 25  in  Man.  (In  Publication).  UNCLASSIFIED  Report. 

21.  Bertino,  J.  R.  ,  Klee,  G.  D.  ,  and  Weintraub,  W.  Effects  of 
Certain  Vitamins  and  Histamines  on  the  LSD  Psychoses.  J.  Men.  Sc.  1 05, 
1095-1099  (1959). 

22.  Report  of  the  Ad  Hoc  Study  Group  on  Psychochemical  Agents. 
PBC  206/1.  Office  of  the  Asst  Secty  of  Defense,  R&D,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 
November  1955. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


48 


CONFIDENTIAL 


(C)  APPENDIX 

TWO  PERSONAL  REACTIONS  TO  EA  1729  (C) 


(Dose;  lOO/xg/kg) 

1.  (U).  I  experienced  a  multitude  of  strange,  unusual  sensations  impinging 

upon  me  from  every  quarter.  Visually,  new  bizarre  colors  and  shapes  flashed 
across  my  visual  field.  My  hearing  was  changed.  Sometimes  things  seemed 
to  be  louder,  sometimes  softer,  and  at  times  they  seemed  to  come  from  a 
distance  when  actually  they  did  not.  At  times  my  voice  sounded  as  if  it  were 
not  my  own.  The  outer  world  was  seen  in  separate,  divided,  jagged  units, 
units  that  at  times  seemed  to  overlap,  divide,  and  move  independently.  Things 
would  often  seem  to  jiggle  as  I  walked.  My  body  parts  did  not  seem  to  be  in  the 
familiar  relationship.  I  had  to  concentrate  to  be  sure  that  my  legs  were  there. 

It  was  a  repeated  surprise  to  find  that  1  was  able  to  stand  up.  My  hands  felt 
icy  and  different;  my  sense  of  touch  was  not  as  good  as  usual,  and  rubbing  my 
hands  together  gave  me  little  feeling.  Swallowing  a  drink  of  water  revealed 
quite  well  this  inability  to  perceive  accurate  relationships  between  my  body 
parts,  for  it  felt  as  if  the  water  was  going  down  in  a  right,  left,  halting, 
circuitous  fashion,  and  that  at  any  moment  it  would  decide  that  it  could  not 
go  down  at  all,  not  because  of  any  feeling  of  nausea;  but  because  it  seemed 
as  though  the  water  was  getting  lost  and  would  have  to  come  back.  Waves  of 
empty,  icy,  unfamiliar  feelings  gave  me  a  feeling  of  bodily  tottering  in  oceanic 
waves.  Each  time  a  wave  hit  me,  I  would  have  to  try  to  redefine  my  relationship 
to  space.  These  bodily  sensations  seemed  to  have  an  anticipatory  relationship 
to  a  sensation  of  blindness  that  overtook  me  from  behind  and  to  the  aide.  As 
I  looked  to  the  side,  I  could  see  but  felt  as  if  I  wouldn't  be  able  to.  I  was 
continuously  being  surprised  by  my  capacity  to  function.  I  felt  as  if  I  could 
hardly  talk,  and  yet  when  I  put  in  the  effort,  I  could.  I  felt  like  I  would  be 
very  ataxic,  but  really  was  not.  I  felt  that  time  was  going  much  slower  than 
it  really  was.  ' 

The  more  commonplace  and  usual  things  1  could  see,  hear,  and  do, 
the  better  I  felt.  .  To  talk,  walk,  and  listen  to  others  talk  was  anxiety- 
relieving.  To  be  alone  with  my  eyes  shut  was  most  disturbing.  I  began  to 
worry  that  possibly  this  experience  was  not  going  to  be  just  temporary.  When 
I  began  coming  out  of  the  reaction,  wonderful  feelings  were  connected  with 
seeing,  touching,  and  being  close  to  the  common,  usual,  and  familiar  things. 
Whether  or  not  these  things  were  good,  pleasant,  or  distasteful  had  little 
bearing.  As  long  as  they  were  familiar,  they  were  highly  reassuring. 


CONFIDENTIAL 


49 


UNCLASSIFIED 


II.  (U)  The  first  symptoms  began  to  appear  in  15  to  20  minutes  after 
taking  the  drug.  The  first  thing  I  noticed  was  a  heavy  feeling  in  my  arms  and 
legs.  I  felt  as  if  I  were  glued  to  the  chair  in  which  I  was  seated.  Faces 
appeared  to  have  a  reddish  glow.  The  walls  began  to  move  back  and  forth 
in  about  three  or  four  planes.  Everything  was  in  technicolor,  so  to  speak, 
and  each  color  was  in  its  own  separate  dimension. 

At  about  this  time,  I  noticed  that  time  began  to  stand  still.  My 
mind  was  racing  ahead  many,  many  hours,  while  those  around  me  were 
living  in  minutes,  This  was  the  most  confusing  of  the  experiences  I  felt. 
Time  had  no  meaning.  I  could  not  relate  experience  with  time,  nor  could  I 
concentrate  on  any  one  thing  long  enough  to  accomplish  anything  that  I  tried 
to  do. 


I  would  start  to  write  something  down  and  forget  what  it  was 
before  I  could  lift  my  pencil.  So  many  things,  sights,  and  sounds  entered  my 
mind  in  a  second  that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  maintain  a  continuous 
train  of  thought. 

When  I  would  close  my  eyes,  I  witnessed  the  moat  beautiful 
display  of  designs  and  colors  1  have  ever  seen.  When  my  eyes  opened,  they 
disappeared.  I  also  experienced  a  sensation  of  leaving  this  world  that  can 
only  be  described  as  just  not  being  here.  In  these  out-of-the-world  flights, 

1  would  live  for  weeks,  it  seemed,  and  yet,  when  I  returned,  only  a  matter  of 
seconds  would  have  elapsed  from  the  time  I  left. 

I  actually  thought  days  and  nights  were  passing  and  that  they  had 
slipped  us  a  larger  dose  than  the  others.  I  felt  depressed  for  short  periods 
and  then  extremely  elated.  All  this  over  nothing.  After  awhile  I  noticed 
that  the  flights  were  becoming  less  frequent  and  that  the  periods  of  rationality 
were  increasing.  .Finally,  after  about  eight  hours,  all  of  the  symptoms  were 
just  about  gone.  Under  combat  conditions  I  could  not  have  performed  my 
mission. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


Appendix 


50 


UNCLASSIFIED 


DISTRIBUTIOM  LIST  NO.  19 


Copies  made:  128 


1 

2-6 

7-10 

11 

12  -  13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 

22  -  24 
25  -  26 
■  27 

28  -  29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34  -  35 

36 

37 


Mall  and  File  Record  Center,  CBDL  (Record  Copy) 

CRDL  Library,  CRDL 

Publications  Branch,  Technical  Information  Division 

Director  of  Medical  Research,  CRDL 

Chief,  Clinical  Research  Division,  CRDL 

Aerospace  Medicine  Division  (AFCS6-11.4) ,  Directorate  of  Professional 
Services,  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General,  Headquarters  USAF, 
Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Aerospace  Technical  Intelligence  Center,  Attn:  AFClN-4E2a, 
Wright-Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio 

Air  Force  Intelligence  Center  (AFCIN-3W4) ,  Department  of  the  Air 
Force,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Air  Force  Missile  Test  Center,  Ground  Safety  Office,  Attn;  MTBS, 
Patrick  Air  Force  Base,  Florida 

Bureau  of  Yards  and  Docks,  Department  of  the  Navy,  Washington  25, 

D.  C. ,  Attn:  Code  D-440C 

BW-CW  Division,  Office,  Atomic,  Biological  and  Chemical  Warfare, 
ODDB&E,  Room.3E  1071,  The  Pentagon,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chemical  Corps  Liaison  Officer,  U.S.A.  Combat  Development  Experi¬ 
mentation  Center,  Fort  Ord,  California 

Chief,  Bureau  of  Medicine  &  Surgery,  Special  Weapons  Defense  Division 
(Code  74),  Department  of. the  Navy,  Washington  15,  D.  C. 

Chief,  Bureau  of  Ships  (Code  333),  Department  of  the  Navy, 

Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief,  Bureau  of  Ships  (Code  362),  Department  of  the  Navy, 

Washington  25,  D.  C, 

Chief,  Bureau  of  Supplies  and  Accounts  (Wl) ,  Department  of  the  Navy, 
Room  1418  T-3  Building,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief  Chemical  Officer,  Departpient  of  the  Army,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief,  Combat  Materiel  Division,  Office,  Chief  of  Research  and 
Development,  Department  of  the  Army,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief,  Develo]»nentB  Division,  Medical  Section,  U.  S.  Continental 
Army  Command,  Fort  Monroe,  Virginia 

Chief,  Human  Factors  Division,  Directorate  of  Research  and  Technology, 
DCS/Development,  Headquarters  USAF,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief,  Life  Sciences  Division,  Army  Research  Office,  Office  of  the 
Chief  of  Research  and  Development,  Room  3D442,  The  Pentagon, 
Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Chief  of  Naval  Operations,  Op-922G,  The  Pentagon,  Washington  25, 

D.  C. 

Chief,  Preventive  Medicine  Division,  Office  of  the  Surgeon  General, 
Department  of  the  Army,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Commandant  of  the  Marine  Corps,  Headquarters,  U.  S.  Marine  Corps, 
Washington  25,  D.  C. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


UNCLASSIFIED 


DISTRIBUTION  LIST  NO.  19  (Contd.) 

38  Commandant,  USA  Command  &  General  Staff  College,  Attn:  Archives, 

Fort  Leavenworth,  Kansas 

39  >  40  Commander,  U.  S.  Naval  Missile  Center,  Point  Mugu,'  California, 

Attn:  Technical  Library 

41  Commander,  U.  S.  Naval  Ordnance  Laboratory,  White  Oak,  Silver  Spring, 

Maryland,  Attn;  Technical  Library 

42  Commander,  Wright  Air  Development  Division,  Attn;  WWRDNP-2, 

W^right-Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio 

43  Commander,  Wright  Air  Development  Division,  Attn:  WWRDMP-3, 

Wrlght-Patterson  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio 
44  -  45  Commanding  General,  Attn:  Technical  Library,  Building  313, 

Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  Md. 

46  Commanding  General,  HQ  QM  Research  &  Engineering  Command, 

Attn:  Chief,  Special  Weapons  Protection  Branch,  Chemicals  & 
Plastics  Division,  QM  Research  &  Engineering  Center,  U.  S.  Army, 
Natick,  Massachusetts 

47  Commanding  General,  U.S.A.  Chemical  Corps' Research  6t  Development 

Conunand,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

48  Commanding  General,  U.S.A.  Medical  Research  &  Development  Command, 

Attn;  Major  David  N.  Dalton,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

49  Commanding  General,  U.S.A.  Medical  Research  &  Development  Command, 

Main  Navy  Building,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

50  Commanding  General,  U.  S.  Continental  Army  Command,  ATTN:  DCSMD 

(MGP) ,  Fort  Monroe ,  Virginia  j 

51  Commanding  Officer  and  Director  (Code  L3i),  U.  S.  Naval  Civil 

Engineering  Laboratory,  Port  Hueneme,  California 

52  Commanding  Officer  &  Director  (Code  222A) ,  U.  S.  Naval  Radiological 

Defense  Laboratory,  San  Francisco  24,  California 

53  Commanding  Officer,  Naval  Medical  Field  Research  Laboratory, 

Camp  Lejeune,  North  Carolina,  Attn;  Library 

54  Commanding  Officer,  Plcatinny  Arsenal,  Attn:  0rdbb-VS3,  Dover, 

New  Jersey 

55  Commanding  Officer  U.S.A.  Environmental  Hygiene  Agency,  Building 

1235,  Army  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

56  -  57  Commanding  Officer,  U.S.A.  Chemical  Corps  Biological  Laboratories, 

Attn:  Technical  Information  Division,  Tech  Library,  Fort  Detrlck, 
Frederick,  Md. 

58  Commanding  Officer,  U.S.A.  Chemical  Corps  Engineering  Command, 

Attn:  Chief  Engineer,  Army  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

59  Commanding  Officer,  U.  S.  A.  Chemical  Corps  Proving  Ground, 

Attn:  Chief,  CW  Operations  Division,  Dugway,  Utah 

60  Commanding  Officer,  U.  S.  A.  Chemical  Corps  Proving  Ground, 

Attn:  Technical  Library,  Dugway,  Utah 

61  Commanding  Officer,  U  S.A.  Chemical  Corps  Training  Command, 

Fort  McClellan,  Alabama 


UNCLASSIFIED 


UNCLASSIFIED 


62 

63 

64 

65 

66  -  67 
68 

69  -  70 

71 

72 

n  -  74 

73 

76 

77 

78 

79  -  84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91  -  98 


DISTRIBUTION  LIST  NO.  19  (Contd.) 

Commanding  Officer,  U.S.A.  Medical  Research  &  Nutrition  Laboratory, 
Fltzslmons  General  Hospital,  Denver  30,  Colorado 
Commanding  Officer,  D.  S.  Army  Ordnance,  Frankford  Arsenal, 

Attn:  Medical  Director,  Philadelphia  37,  Pennsylvania 
Commanding  Officer,  U.S.A.  Transportation  Research  Command, 

Attn:  Research  Reference  Center,  Fort  Eustls,  Virginia 
Commanding  Officer,  U.  S.  Naval  Unit,  Building  51,  Army  Chemical 
Center,  Md. 

Deputy  IG  for  Safety,  AFCNS-M,  Rlrtland  Air  Force  Base,  New  Mexico 
Director,  Air  University  Library,  Attn:  AUL-8879,  Maxwell  Air 
Force  Base,  Alabama 

The  Director,  Armed  Forces  Institute  of  Pathology,  Attn:  Chief, 
Radiation  Pathology  Branch,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Director,  Ballistic  Research  Laboratories,  Attn:  ORDB6-BBL-T, 
Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  Md. 

Director,  Marine  Corps  Landing  Force  Development  Center,  Marine 
Corps  Schools,  Quantlco,  Virginia 

Director,  Restricted  Weapons  Defense  Division,  U.  S.  Naval  Schools 
Command,  Treasure  Island,  San  Francisco  30,  California 
Director,  U.S.A.  CBR  Weapons  Orientation  Course,  Dugway  Proving 
Ground,  Dugway,  Utah 

Director,  U.S.A.  Chemical  Corps  Operations  Research  Group, 

Building  483,  Army  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

Director,  USAF  Project  RAND,  Via:  Air  Force  Liaison  Office,  The 
RAND  Corporation,  1700  Main  Street,  Santa  Monica,  California, 

Attn:  Library 

Director,  U.  S.  Naval  Research  Laboratory,  Washington  25,  D.  C. , 
Attn:  Code  1071 

Major  R.  R.  Doddridge,  Canadian  Army  Technical  Representative, 
Building  330,  Ainny  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

Headquarters,  Ordnance  Ammunition  Command,  U.  S.  Army, 

Attn:  ORDLY-S,  Joliet,  Illinois 
Headquarters,  Strategic  Air  Command,  Attn;  SUP3.1,  Offutt  Air 
Force  Base,  Nebraska  '  - 

Headouarters ,  Strategic  Air  Command,  Attn;  DINC,  Offutt  Air  Force 
Bas^,  Nebraska 

Headquarters  Tactical  Air  Command,  Langley  Air  Force  Base,  Virginia, 
Attn:  TMEM-AM 

Headquarters  Tactical  Air  Command,  Langley  Air  Force  Base,  Virginia, 
Attn;  TOOT-T 

Headquarters  Tactical  Air  Command,  Langley  Air  Force  Base,  Virginia, 
Attn;  TPL-RQD 

Mr.  Ronald  Holmes,  Defense  Research  Staff/XW,  British  Embassy, 

3100  Massachusetts  Avenue,  N.  W. ,  Washington  8,  D.  C. 


UNCLASSIFIED 


99 

100 

101 

102 

103 

104 

105 

106 

107 

108 

109 

110 

111  -  112 
113  -  114 

115 

116 

117 

118 

119  -  128 


SECRET 

DISTRIBOTIfMI  LIST  NO.  19  (Contd.) 

Medical  Information  &  Intelligence  Agency,  U.  S.  Army  Medical 
Service,  Attn:  Director,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Office  of  the  Chief  Chemical  Officer,  Attn:  Chief,  Safety  Branch, 
Department  of  the  Army,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Office  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Department  of  the  Army,  Attn:  OBDFA-T, 
Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Office  Chief  of  Ordnance,  Department  of  the  Army,  Attn:  0SD6U-5A, 
Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Office  of  the  Senior  Standardization  Representative,  U  S. A.  Standardl 
zatlon  Group,  Canada,  c/o  Directorate  of  Weapons  &  Development, 
Canadian  Army  Headquarters,  Ottawa, Canada 

Office  of  the  Surgeon  (MCD) ,  Headquarters,  Air  Materiel  Command, 
Wright -Patters on  Air  Force  Base,  Ohio 

Operations  Research  Office,  The  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Attn: 
Document  Control  Office,  6935  Arlington  Road,  Bethesda  14,  Md. 

Post  Surgeon,  Rocky  Mountain  Arsenal,  Denver  30,  Colorado 

President,  U.S.A.  Chemical  Corps  Board,  Building  483,  Army  Chemical 
Center,  Md. 

School  of  Aviation  Medicine,  USAF,  Attn;  SAMLIBR,  Brooks  Air  Force 
Base,  Texas 

Senior  Army  Representative,  Department  of  Health,  Education  & 

Welfare,  Room  2078  South  Building,  Washington  25,  D.  C. 

Senior  Standardization  Representative,  U.S.A.  Standardization  Group- 
UK,  Attn:  Chemical  Representative,  Box  65,  USN  100,  FPO,  New  York, 
N.  Y. 

Technical  Library,  Room  G-2B,  Office  of  Civil  and  Defense  Mobiliza¬ 
tion,  Atth;  Director,  Technical  Library,  Battle  Creek,  Michigan 

3415th  Technical  School,  USAF  (TORF) ,  Lowry  Technical  Training 
Center  (ATC) ,  Lowry  Air  Force  Base  30,  Colorado 

U.  S.  Army  Chemical  Corps  Advisory  Council,  Building  330,  Army 
Chemical  Center,  Md, 

U.  S.  CONARC  Liaison  Officer,  Building  330,  Army  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical 
Center,  Washington  12,  D.  C. 

British  Liaison  Officer,  Building  3(30,  Array  Chemical  Center,  Md. 

Commander,  Armed  Services  Technical  Information  Agency,  Attn:  TIPCR, 
Arlington  Hall  Station,  Arlington  12,  Virginia 


SECRET 


CONFIDENTIAL 


I  AU _ Acceation  No._. _ 

I  Clinical  Reaearch  Division.  U.  S,  Army  Chemical 
I  Research  and  Development  Laboratories,  Army 
'  Chemical  Center,  Maryland 
I  CI.INICAL  INVESTIGATION  OF  EA  1729  (U)  - 
I  Van  M.  Sim 

CRDLR  3074,  June  1961 
I  Project  eC08-02-022.  SECRET  REPORT 


- 1 

CONFIDENTIAL  | 

1.  LSD25,' clinical  | 

studies  I 

2.  LSD 25,  animal  1 

studies 

3.  LSD25.  field  tests  ' 


IC)  liSD25  has  been  studied  extensively  in  animals 
and  in  humans  as  a  possible  incapacitating  CW 
compound.  Clinical,  physiological,  and 
psychiatric  studies  have  shown  that  this  drug 
psychologically  incapacitates  man  at  a  very 
low  dose. 


4.  LSD25,  biological 
activity 

5.  Incapacitating  agents, 
L.SD25 


AD _ _ Accession  No. 

Clinical  Research  Division,  U.  S.  Army  Chemical 
Research  and  Development  Laboratories,  Army 
Chemical  Center,  Maryland 
CLINICAL  INVESTIGATION  OF  EA  1729  (U)  - 
Van  M.  Sim 

CRDLR  3074,  June  1961 

Project  4C0ti-02-f)22.  SECRET  REPORT 


CONFIDENTIAL 

CONFIDENTIAL 

1.  LSD25.  clinical 
studios 

2.  LSD25,  animal 
studios 

3.  LSD25,  field  test 


(C)  JjSD25  has  been  studied  extensively  in  animals 
and  in  humans  as  a  possible  Incapacitating  CW 
compound.  Clinical,  physiological,  and 
psychiatric  studies  have  shown  that  this  drug 
psychologically  incapacitates  man  at  a  very 
low  dose. 


4.  LSD25,  biological 
activity 

5. -  Incapacitating  agents, 

LSD25 


AD _ Accession  No. _ 

Clinical  Research  Division,  U.  S.  Army  Chemical 
Research  and  Dc vcloptncnl  Laboratories,  Army 
Chemical  Center,  Maryland 
CLINICAL  INVESTIGATION  OF  EA  1729  (U)  - 
Van  M.  Sim 

CRDI  R  3074  Tim«  19f,l 
Project  4C0H-02-022,  SECRET  REPORT 


CONFIDENTIAL  | 

- 1 

CONFIDENTIAL  1 

1.  JjSD25.  clinical  I 

stud’cc  '  j 

2.  LSD25,  animal  I 

studies  I 

3.  LSDZ5,  field  test  | 


(C)  LSD25  has  been  studied  extensively  in  animals 
and  in  humans  as  a  possible  incapacitating  CW 
compound.  Clinical,  physiological,  and 
psychiatric  studies  have  shown  that  this  drug 
psychologically  incapacitates  man  at  a  very 
low  dose. 


4.  LSD25,  biological 
activity 

5.  Incapacitating  agents, 
LSD  25 


CONFIDENTIALj 


CONFIDENTIAL 


