A NEW MEXICAN PSYCHOTROPIC DRUG
     FROM THE MINT FAMILY                                1




                                    BY
                       R.   Gordon Wasson        2




Fob a number of years we have been exploring the high-
lanes of southern Mexico in a study of the role played
   hallucinogenic mushrooms in the reliirious life of the
Indians. We began by visiting the Sierra Mazateca in
1953, in the northernmost part of the state of Oaxaca,
returning there in 1955 and every year thereafter through
1902.  At an early date we learned of a psychotropic plant
that the Mazatecs consume when mushrooms are not
available. But as we and our collaborator Roger Heim
were concentrating on the difficult task of locating and
identifying the various species of hallucinogenic             mush-
rooms, we had to neglect for some time this plant that
the Indians employ as a less desirable substitute. In 1900
and 1961, we brought back specimens and submitted
them for determination to Schultes and to Epling. All
of t lie specimens available proved to be unsatisfactory
for specific identification. Finally, in September and
October of 1962, satisfactory herbarium material reached
                                    *




us, when we were in San Jose Tenango, on which Dr.
Epling could base his specific description. Tenango, at

      Submitted for publication October 24, 1962.
 •>


      Research Fellow, Botanical   Museum of Harvard I'niversity.

                                    /   /
about 1200 meters altitude, is elose to and above the
tier ra caliente of Vera Cruz.

     We now identity a species of Salvia new to botanists,
S.   divinorum Epling & Jativa,           as a   psychotropic drug
used traditionally bv the Mazatec Indians of Oaxaca,
Mexico, in their divination     To the ever growing
                                     rites.

family of Mexican phantastica a new member is thus
added, and for the     first   time a species of the Labiatae
joins this interesting group.
  The plant is familiar to virtually all Mazatecs. In
Iluautla de Jimenez (1800 meters) we saw two or three
plants growing, and a specimen taken to Mexico City is
still   alive there in the open air; but these plants do not
flower.    We have never seen the seeds, and no Indian has
been able to tell us about them. The plant is reproduced
veeetativelv from a shoot stuck into the ground. It re-
quires black soil, rather than clay, and for the plant to
prosper moisture must be steady.              Many, perhaps most,
Mazatec families possess a private supply of the plants,
but almost invariably they are not near the              home nor
near trails where passers-by might see them.             We were
on the watch for Salvia divinorum as we criss-crossed the
Sierra Mazateca on horseback in September and October
of 1962, but never once did we see it. The Indians choose
some remote ravine for the planting of it and they are
loath to reveal the spots. No Indian in San Jose Tenango
was willing to take us to the plants whence they brought
back specimens to      us.     Salvia divinorum seems to be a
cultigen; whether      it   occurs in a wild state (except for
plants that have been abandoned or have escaped) we do
not know.
     In former times the proprietors of land paid no atten-
tion to growths of hallucinogenic mushrooms and Salvia
divinorum; but in the        last   four or five years the market
for the    mushrooms and the possibility of a market for
                                    78]
the Salvia have made them conscious of a potential value
here.      Several episodes have recently taken place in the
vicinity of Huautla in which the owner has enforced his
right to the plants.
  The Mazatecs who speak Spanish refer to Salvia divino-
rum as hojas de la Pastora, or hojas de Maria Pastora
("leaves of the Shepherdess" or "leaves of Mary the
Shepherdess"), and this is also the translation of the
                3
name in Mazatec   ska* Pastora.
                          :




  The Mazatec name is curious. In Christian tradition
the Virgin Mary is not thought of as a shepherdess. Is
the "Pastora" concept a survival of the pre-Christian
duefio de los animales, "the Lord of the animals," that
figures large in the folk tradition of the Middle Ameri-
can Indians?          A pagan association would thus be sancti-
fied by the addition of the Virgin's name.
  Salvia divinorum is, in the minds of the Mazatecs,
only the most important of several plants, all Labiatae,
that they regard as members of the same 'family. " Salvia
                                                     '




divinorum        is   known as la hembra, "the female." El
macho, or "the male,"             is   Coleus pumila, of European
origin. Then there is elnene,
                          "the child," and el ahijado,
"the godson," which are both forms of Coleus Blumei.
Some Indians insist that these others are likewise psycho-
tropic, but we have not tried them             ;   others say these are
merely medicinal.
   We have found no reference to the use of the leaves
of Salvia divinorum in the 16th and 17th Century
writers. We have found only two passages that may re-
fer to them in modern writers. Dr. Bias Pablo Reko, a
pioneer in Mexican ethnobotanical field work, discussing
the hallucinogenic mushrooms, adds (Mitobotdnica zapo-

  •a
       The superscript digit indicates the tone of the syllable, which is
the lowest of four tones in Mazatec.


                                       79]
           :            :




teca,          Mexico, 1945, p. 17) a sentence that, translated,
says
   We cannot fail to mention here another magic plant whose leaves
produce visions and which the Cuicatecs and Mazatecs (in the districts
of Cuicatlan and Teotitlan) call           divination leaf."   The loose leaves
that   I       have received do not permit their scientific identification.

  This refers probably to the Salvia divinorum of the
Mazatecs. There is a longer reference in a paper by Ing.
Robert J. Weitlaner ("Curaciones Mazatecas" in An.
Inst. Nac. Anthrop. Hist. 4, No. 32 (1952) 283). While
Weitlaner was in Ojitlan, a Chinantec village, he en-
countered a native of Jalapa de Diaz, a neighboring
Mazatec town, who told him of the use among his fellow-
townsmen of a plant known as Verba de Maria. This
informant's account, in a shortened paraphrased transla-
tion, follows
   Verba Maria resembles somewhat the yerba mora, but it has slightly
wider leaves. Only the leaves are used, putting them in water. First
the leaves are rubbed together in the hands, the water is not boiled,
and they are used for very specific purposes. When the curandero goes
to the forest in search of this plant, before cutting it he must kneel
and pray to it. They are not witch-doctors; but the leaves are cut
only when they are needed, after praying.
   For example, if someone is suffering from a sickness, and the doc-
tors do not know what is the matter, then with this plant they divine
the disease. The curandero who brings the leaves first asks the sick
person if he is addicted to taking alcohol, because, when a man does
not take alcohol, fifty leaves are prescribed;         when he takes alcohol,
then 100 leaves are prescribed. The sick person drinks the water in
which the leaves have been rubbed. At midnight, the curandero goes
with him and another person to a place where there is no noise, as
for example an isolated house, where the patient takes the potion.
They wait 15 minutes for the drug to take effect, and the patient him-
self begins to state the kind of sickness from which he suffers. The
patient finds himself in a semi-delirious state, he speaks as in a trance,
and the others listen attentively to what he says. He shakes his
clothes, as though with the aid of the plant he would free himself from
the little beasties [presumed cause, in the Indian mind, of the illness].
At dawn the curandero bathes the patient with the water of which he
lias drunk, and thereupon the patient is cured.



                                        [80]
   People say that with this bath goes away the drunken state pro-
duced by the plant that the patient has taken.
   When it is a question of a theft, or a thing lost, the curandero lis-
tens to what is said by the man who has taken the plant, and thus
the facts are disclosed.
   There is in Jalapa de Diaz an individual named Felipe Miranda,
who every three or six months goes to the mountains to gather the
plant. He makes wonderful cures and finds himself in a good economic
situation. They say he cultivates and tends to the plant, but he does
not reveal the kind of plant that it is.


  The identification of Salvia divinorum is long over-
due. The plant is present the whole year round, and the
Mazatecs do not hesitate to discuss it, since they are
much less inhibited with respect to this plant than they
used to be when talking about the sacred mushrooms. In
recent years Huautla has changed greatly, the highway
having reached there in 1958-9 and the new-born traffic
in the psychotropic mushrooms having its focus there.
Among the visitors to Huautla there have been a num-
ber of botanists and mycologists. In Mexico City the
Iiqjas de la Pastora are a frequent theme of discussion in

botanical circles. It is hard to understand how the plant
has avoided classification until now.
   So far as our information goes, the area of diffusion of
the hojas de la Pastora is confined to the Mazatec coun-
try and possibly the immediately contiguous Cuicatec
and Chinantec areas. But it may well be known and used
elsewhere. We shall await with curiosity the reports of
informants from other regions following the publication
of this article. Ololiuqui (Rivea corymbosa (L.) Hallier
filius) is known among the Mazatecs, but they seem to

prefer for divinition the hqjas de la Pastora to the semilla
de la Flor de la Virgen, "seed of the Flower of the Vir-
gin," as the Mazatecs call ololiuqui.
   On Wednesday, July 12, 1961, I ate the "hojas de la
Pastora** and experienced their effects. I was in Ayautla,

                                [81]
stopping in the home of Dona Donata Sosa de Garcia.
She introduced me to a number of curanderas: Augus-
tina Borja, Clementina Unda, Maria Sebastiana Carrera,
and Sara Unda de la Hoz.
   On the evening of that day, the first two came to the
house shortly before 11 o'clock, and Augustina Borja
performed the ceremony in a large spare room. Those
present were Irmgard Weitlaner Johnson, mj' daughter
Mary X. Britten ('Masha"), Dona Donata, and her
daughter Consuelo ('Chelo"). Augustina Borja was the
daughter of a curandero who had died about ten years
before. Her own daughters often accompany her on her
        visits and are themselves buddinu curanderas. On

the evening that we spent with her, she came along
Clementina Unda. They were careful to orient thems
to the east as thev set the staire for the ceremony. 1
M                                                      d
near as possible in that direction; never to the west,
which is considered sinister. Augustina was performing
— she took mushrooms, rather than the hqjas; these                I



had requested especially, as I had never taken them.
Both mushrooms                          d in oairs. Th
                d   off',   care being exercised to assembl
leaves that are fla   1
                                                           is.   In
orenaration for the                                        ed on
top of each other, each pair being face to face. It is cus-
tomarj for the Indians to consume the leaves by nibbling
       T



at the dose with their incisor teeth.     This proved to be
impossible for me, owing to the taste  and I was treated
                                          ;




as a toothless person. There being no nictate (stone
grinding board) handy, Augustina squeezed the leaves
with her hands and collected the juice in a glass. This
was certainly an inefficient method. Some water was
added. I drank the dark fluid, about half a
                                                   I


                               [   82 ]
that frequently Indians vomit on eating the leaves, which
is   easy to believe. It was possible for me, however, to
retain the fluid.
  After having eaten her mushrooms, without more ado
our curandera launched into singing, intoning in Maza-
tec with vigor. She kept this up for two hours, in a
rather monotonous voice. I tape-recorded her singing
but have yet to find someone who will give a rendering
in English or Spanish.
     The effect of the leaves came sooner than would have
been the case with the mushrooms, was less sweeping,
and lasted a shorter time. There was not the slightest
doubt about the effect, but it did not go beyond the ini-
tial effect of the mushrooms — dancing colors in elaborate,
three-dimensional designs.   Whether a larger dose would
have produced a greater effect, I do not know.
   A day or two before the events that I have narrated,
the curandera Maria Sebastiana Carrera had supplied us
with many details about the use of the leaves and had
even chanted the words of the ceremony after her usage.
She had declined to admit us to an actual ceremony be-
cause her neighbors (and doubtless she herself) would
have considered the performance before outsiders a dese-
crat ion and scandalous. Even as it was, when her session
with us was drawing to a close, she burst into uncontrol-
lable tears, fell on her knees, and begged forgiveness for
what she had done. She had also given us valuable cos-
mological legends that are still believed in among the
villagers,which 1 hope to publish elsewhere.
   On October                          San Jose T
go. This time it consisted of Dr. Albert Hofmann, his
wife Anita, Irmgard Weitlaner Johnson, Herlinda Mar-
tinez Cid (who served as Mazatec interpreter), and me.
Ihrough the good offices of Roberto Carrera, the son of
Aurelio Carrera of Huautla, we were introduced to Con-

                          [83]
suelo Garcia, about 35 years old, a vigorous, good-looking
curandera, who that night performed for us a divinatory
rite. She used only the leaves, not mushrooms. She
ground them on her metate, after passing them through
the smoke of copal, and she did a thorough job of it.
Water is added to the mass that comes off the metate,
the whole is put through a strainer, and then we drank
the liquor. I took the juice of five pair and Mrs. Hofmann
of three pair. We both felt the effects, which were as I
described them in the ceremony in Ayautla the year
before.
            seem, in summary, that we are on the thresh-
     It would

old of the discovery of a complex of psychotropic plants
in   the Labiatae or Mint Family.   We know that Salvia
diviner um is soemployed in the Sierra Mazateca, and
Cofeus pumila and two "forms" of C. Blumei are said by
some of the Indians to be similarly used.




                          [84]
