



REMARKS 
THE EFFECTS OF ANHELONIUM LEWINIT 
(THE MESCAL BUTTON). 
By S. WEIR MITCHELL, M.D., LL.D.Epm., 


Honorary Member British Medical Association; Honorary Fellow of the 
Royal Medical and Chirurgical Society. 





THE history of the use of mescal by the Indians of New 
Mexico is very well known in the United States, and espe- 
cially through the valuable papers of Dr. Prentiss, of Wash- 
ington, D.C.? 

These so interested me that I asked him to favour me 
with some of the extract. Profiting by his kindness, I made 
a trial of the drug on May 24th, 1896, by taking it as I shall 
now relate. 

At 12 noon of a busy morning I took fully 13 drachm of an 
extract of which each drachm represented one mescal button. 
I had in a half-hour a sense of great gastric discomfort, and 
later of distension. At1 p.m. I took a little over a drachm. 
Between 2 and 3 p.m. 1 noted my face as flushed; the pupils 
were dilated midway, the pulse 80 and strong. I had a 
slight sense of exhilaration, a tendency to talk, and now and 
then I misplaced a word. The knee jerk and station were 
normal. Between 2 and 4 0’clock I had outside of my house 
two consultations, and saw several patients. I observed that 
with a pleasing sense of languor there was an nnusual 

1 Read before the American Neurological society. 
2 Therapeutic Gazette, September, 1895. 












| 
| 
| 
| 




































































Tue Britisx 
Mepicat JounNaL 


1626 


| 


ANHELONIUM LEWINII. 





[Dxc. 5) 1896, 
SS 





amount of physical endurance. I went rather quietly, taking 
two stairs at a time and without pause, to the fourth storey 
of an hotel, and did not feel oppressed or short of breath. 
This is akin to the experience I learn, of the mescal- 
eating Indians, and to that of many white men. 

Meanwhile my stomach was more uncomfortable, and I 
saw the first evidence of any change in my colour records. 
On closing my eyes (while in my carriage), I held longer 
than usual any bright object just seen. As to this, however, 
I am not as sure asI am concerning the later phenomena. 
About 4.10 p.m. I drove home, and after taking half an ounce 
of extract in three doses I lay on a lounge and read, becoming 
steadily more conscious, at first of a left frontal pain (not 
severe) and soon after of a dull occipital ache felt on both 
sides and at or about the occipital bosses. Yawning at 
times, sleepy, deliciously at languid ease, I was clearly in 
‘*the land where it is always afternoon.” At 4.30 P.M., rising 
to make notes, I became aware that a transparent, violet 
haze was about my pen point, a tint so delicate as at times 
to seem doubtfully existent. 

At this stage of the mescal intoxication I had a certain 
-sense of the things about me as having a more positive exist- 
ence than usual. It is not easy to define what I mean, and at 
the time I searched my vocabulary for phrase or word which 
should fitly state my feeling. It was vain. 

At this time, also, I had a decisive impression that I was J 
more competent in mind than in my every-day moods. I 
seemed to be sure of victoriously dealing with problems.7 
This state of mind may be easily matched in the condition of 4 
some men when pretty far gone in alcohol intoxication. My 
own mood was gently flattering—a mere consciousness of 
power, with meanwhile absolute control of every faculty.- 
{ wrote a long letter of advice dealing with a rather doubtful 
diagnosis, and on reading it over was able to see that it was 
neither better nor worse than my average letter. Yet the sense 
of increased ability was so notable that, liking to test it, and 
with common-sense disbelief in its flattery, I took up a cer- 
tain paper on psychology, which a week before I had laid 
down in despair. I grieve to say that it was less to be com- 
prehended than ever. My ignorance would have remained 
bliss had 1 not made the experiment. I next tried to do a 
complicated sum, but soon discovered that my ordinary in- 
efficiency as to figures was not really increased. 

A mood is like a climate and cannot be reasoned with. I 
continued to have for some two hours this elated sense of- 
superiority. I was for this while in that condition in which 
some people permanently abide. 

The further test.of writing a few lines of verse was tried. I 
found there was much effort needed. I lay down again about 
5.20, observing that the outer space field seemed to be smoky. 
Just at this time, my eyes being closed, I began to see tiny 
points of light, like stars or fire flies, which came and went in 
a moment. My palms were now tingling, my face a little 
flushed. About 5.40 the star points became many, and then I 
began to observe something like fragments of stained 
glass windows. The glass was not very brilliant, but the 
setting, which was irregular in form, seemed to be made of 
incessantly flowing sparkles of pale silver, now going here, 
now there, to and fro, like, as I thought, the inexplicable 
rush and stay and reflux of the circulation seen through a 
lens. These window patterns were like fragments coming into 
view and fading. 

Hoping for still better things in the way of colour, I went 
upstairs, lay down in a darkened room and waited. In a 
few minutes the silver stars were seen again, and later I 
found that these always preceded any other more remarkable 
visions. 

The display which for an enchanted two hours followed 
was such as I find it hopeless to describe in language which 
shall convey to others the beauty and splendour of what I 
saw. I shall limit myself to a statement of a certain number 
of the more definite visions thus projected on the screen of 
consciousness. 

During these two hours I was generally wide awake. I was 
comfortable, save as to certain gastric conditions, which were 


» as 


Especially at the close of my experience I : 
have been for a while in the ce le interval betwoe 
waking state and that of sleep—the “ predormitum” th rr 
when we are apt to dream half-controlied stories: but; _ 
this I am not very sure. As a rule, I was on guard wi" 
every power of observation and reflection in full activit i: 
™ My first vivid show of mescal colour effects came wii 
I saw the stars, and then, of a sudden, here and there d : 
cate floating films of colour—usually delightful heuh 
purples and pinks. These came and went—now here ~ 
there. Then an abrupt rush of countless points of on 
light swept across the field of view, as if the unseen millio 
of the Milky Way were to flow a sparkling river before the 
eye. In a minute this was over and the field was dark 
Then I began to see zigzag lines of very bright colours, lik, 
those seen in some megrims. I tried to fix the place and 
relation of these tints, but the changes were such ag + 
baffle me. One was an arch of angled lines of red and Prodi 
but of what else I could not determine. It was in rapid 
what I may call minute, motion. ’ 

The tints of intense green and red shifted and altered, ang 
soon were seen no more. Here, again, was the wonderful 
loveliness of swelling clouds of more vivid coiours gone befor 
I could name them, and, sometimes rising from the lowe 
field, and very swiftly altering in colour tones from pale 
} purples and rose to greys, with now and then a bar of level 
green or orange intense as Jightning and as momentary, 

When I opened my eyes all was gone at once. Closing 
them I began after a long interval to see for the first time 
definite objects associated with colours. The stars sparkled 
and passed away. <A white spear of grey stone grew up to 
huge height, and became a tall, richly finished Gothic towe 
of very elaborate and definite design, with many rather wor 
statues standing in the doorways or on stone brackets. As] 
gazed every projecting angle, cornice, and even the face of the 
stones at their joinings were by degrees covered or hung with 
clusters of what seemed to be huge precious stones, but uncut, 
some being more like masses of transparent fruit. These 
were green, purple, red, and orange; never clear yellow and 
never blue. All seemed to possess an interior light, and to 
give the faintest idea of the perfectly satisfying intensity and 
purity of these gorgeous colour-fruits is quite beyond my 
power. All the colours I have ever beheld are dull as con- 
pared to these. 

- As I looked, and it lasted long, the tower became of a fine 
mouse hue, and everywhere the vast pendant masses of 
emerald green, ruby reds, and orange began to drip a slor 
rain of colours. All this while nothing was at rest a moment, 
The balls of colour moved tremulously. The tints becam 
dull, and then, at once, past belief vivid; the architectural 
lines were all active with shifting tints. The figures moving 
shook the long hanging lines of living light, and then, ina 
instant, all was dark. 

After an endless display of less beautiful marvels I saw that 
which deeply impressed me. An edge ofa huge cliff seem to 
project over a gulf of unseen depth. My viewless enchante 
set on the brink a huge bird claw of stone. Above, from the 
stem or leg, hung a fragment of some stuff. This began to 
unroll and float out to a distance which seemed to me 
represent Time as well as immensity of Space. Here wer 
miles of rippled purples, half transparent, and of ineffable 
beauty. Now and then soft golden clouds floated from 
these folds, ora great shimmer went over the whole of the 
rolling purples, and things, like green birds, fell from it, flut- 
tering down into the gulf below. Next, I saw clusters oi 
stones hanging in masses from the claw toes, as it seemed to 
me miles of them, down far below into the underworld of the 
black gulf. 

This was the most distinct of my visions. Incautiously | 
opened my eyes, and it was gone. A little later I saw inter 
laced and numberless hoops in the air all spinning swiftly 
and all loaded with threaded jewels or with masses of colow 
in long ropes of clustered balls. I began to wonder why! 
saw no opals, and some minutes after each of these circles 
which looked like a boy’s hoop, became huge opals; if 
should say fluid opals it would best describe what wa 





not so severe as to distract attention. Time passed with 
I was critically attentive, 
making all the time 


little sense for me of its passage. 
watchful, 
menuta 


interested, and curious, 
1 notes for future use. | 





however like nothing earthly. 
I set myself later to seeing if I could conjure figures, for 9 


far I had seen nothing human in form, nor any which seem 
i EE 














. Closin 

first; tine 
| Sparkled 
"eW up to 
thic nan 
ther wor 
ts. As] 
face of the 
lung with 
ut uncut, 
t. These 
sllow and 
t, and to 
nsity and 
yond my 
| as com- 


of a fine 
lasses of 
Pp a slow 
moment, 
3 became 
Litectural 
S moving 
en, in an 


saw that 
f seem to 
nchanter 
from the 
began to 
0 me to 
ere were 
ineffable 
ed from 
e of the 
1 it, flut- 
isters of 
-emed to 
1d of the 


ously | 
ww inter 
r swiftly 
f colour 
ar why! 
circles, 
ils ; ifl 
lat was 


3, for 9 
seemed 





|, de Schweinitz’s more recent paper. 














Dec. 5, 1896.) ANHELONIUM LEWINII. laapreut Jocamat 1627 
—— 


alive. I had no luck at this, but a long while after I saw 
what seemed a shop with apothecaries’ bottles, but of such 
splendour green, red, purple, as are not outside of the pharma- 
cies of fairy land. . ; 
On the left wall was pinned by the tail a brown worm of 
erhaps a hundred feet long. It was slowing rotating, like a 
catherine wheel, nor did it seem loathly. As it turned, long 
reen and red tentacles fell this way and that. On a bench 
near by two little dwarfs, made, it seemed, of leather, were 
plowing through long glass pipes of green tint, which seemed 
to me to be alive, so intensely, vitally green were they. But 
it were vain to find in words what will describe these colours. 
Either they seemed strangely solid, or to possess vitality. 
They still linger visiblyin my memory, and left the feeling that 
[had seen among them colours unknown to my experience. 
Their variety and strange juxtapositions were indeed fas- 
cinating for one to whom colour is more than it is to most 
men; nor is it possible to describe the hundredth of what I 
saw. 1 was at last conscious of the fact that at moments I 
was almost asleep, and then wide awake. In one of these 
magic moments I saw my last vision and the strangest. I 
heard what appeared to be approaching rhythmical sounds 
and then saw a beach, which I knew to be that of Newport. 
On this, with a great noise, which lasted but a moment, 
rolled in out of darkness wave on wave. These as they came 
were liquid splendours huge and threatening, of wonderfully 
pure green, or red or deep purple, once only deep orange, and 
with no trace of foam. These water hills of colour broke on 
the beach with myriads of lights of the same tint as the 
wave. This lasted some time, and while it did so I got back 


‘* As the zigzags fade he has exalted sense of hearing ; loud 
voices hurt him for a half hour, and this is the period of 
vertigo. At one time he had at this period of the attack 
tingling in the fingers of the side opposite to that of the pain. 
After a number of these headaches he is subject to the curious 
and exceptional illusions which have caused me to report his 
case. At times these replace the zigzag lines, but later 
inaseries of headaches they come on independent of the 
on and occur at night, while awake or in full day- 

ight. 

‘“‘t, A common delusion with him is to see about twenty 
feet distant a trellis of silver covered with vines and flowers 
of brilliant tints. This is seen best when the eyes are open, 
and comes and goes. 

‘*2, He sees a series of complex geometrical figures at the 
centre of the field. These are brilliant pink or red. 

“*3, Quite commonly he sees multiple red circles inter- 
twined and in rapid rotation, and once ared eye which seemed 
to approach him from a distance. Sometimes there isa milky 
cascade before both eyes. 

‘*4. He saw once a crescent of silver on the wall, and sus- 
pended from it numerous heads in profile. Some were strange 
to him, and some were vivid revivals of faces which he had 
long forgotten. 

‘5, Six years ago he saw, during an attack, a huge red 
spider, which melted into a series of red rectangles revolving 
in swift motion. 

‘*6, He has several times, and first on awakening, seen the 
dooropened anda procession of white-robed veiled figures enter. 
They did not fade until he arose and lit the gas. These 


to more distinct consciousness, and wished the beautiful--were seen with his eyes open or shut, and he could not 


terror of these huge mounds of colour would continue. 

A knock at my door caused me to open my eyes, and I lost 
whatever of wonder might have come after. 

After dinner I ceased to be able to see any further display 
of interest. Now and then a purple or pink fragment 
appeared, but that was all. For a day after I noted the fact 
that my visions could be easily recalled by a memorial effort, 
but with less and less sharpness. 

These shows are expensive. For two days I had headache, 
and for one day a smart attack of gastric distress. This came 
after the first dose, and was most uncomfortable. The ex- 
perience, however, was worth one such headache and in- 
digestion, but was not worth a second. 

Dr. Prentiss and others describe mescal as causing insomnia 
My first experience with the tincture was made early in the 
morning. I became deeply flushed by noon, but had no 
visions. I felt drowsy and slept very well the following night. 
The extract used, as stated, did make me sleepless up to 
4A.M., but neither restless nor uneasy. 

Some interesting reflections are suggested by my experience 
with this vision-breeding drug, mescal. The effect on me was 
more or less like what is experienced in some ophthalmic 
megrims, and even my most brilliant visions can be matched 
by those I reported in 1887, and by some to be found in Dr. 


The following extract from my own paper will sutticiently 
illustrate what I desire to point out. It concerns one of the 
several cases of megrim with visions which I reported : 

“The symptoms of onset are these: frontal and occipital 
sense of tension lessening towards night, good sleep follows ; 
next day he awakes with some pain between the eyes and 
slight photophobia. The second night, or the morning after 
it, he is aware of being flushed, but has no cerebral throbbing. 
In a few moments the lids feel as if pulled towards the inner 
canthus, and fortification zigzags appear, with next partial 
blurring of vision, which seems in twenty minutes to efface 
the lines and include more or less of the field. The lines 
seem to be projected one inch from the eye, and flash, and 
come and go with shimmering prismatic colours. The dim- 
ming of vision lasts some twenty minutes, and leaves him 
with slight vertigo and a feeling of fulness of the head, but 
pain always begins over the eye which has distinct vision, 
and of this he is sure. It increases as the eyesight clears, and 
is about one inch above the eye. Exertion, stooping, anxiety 
increase it. The pain lasts from one to three hours, and 
ceases without nausea. When it occurs over the left eye he 
has sometimes slight aphasia for five minutes, and in youth 


double them by causing himself to squint by pressure on one 
eye. 

It will have been seen that mescal supplied me with one- 
sided (left) frontal headache—later with occipital pain on 
both sides, with coloured zigzags or fortification lines—the 
rain of silver and disorder of the stomach. I ask myself now 
if the megrims with visions are apt to be found in associa- 
tion with occipital pain in the region of the convolutions, 
which we believe store up our ocularly acquired memories. 
It is worth an inquiry. 

The mode of action of mescal is somewhat curious, and 
may vary with the dose and the man. At first, even at the 
height of drug action, the visions require one to wait with 
. closed eyes for a minute or more. ‘To open the eyes is to 
dismiss the vision, no matter how dark be the room. Sug- 
gestion availed me but little, and no act of will was compe- 
tent to hold my dream unaltered. 

I found in these seeming laws some resemblance to those 
which—in my case, at least—appear to govern a quite ordi- 
nary and normal phenomenon. From childhood I, like some 
r others, can at night, before sleep arrives, summon visions. 
These are not always just what I desire. Once present I can- 
not alter them; they shift, change, and disappear under in- 
fluences not within my capacity to control or to analyse. To 
open my eyes, even in the most intense darkness, dismisses 
these visions. Is it true of opium visions? The same law 
certainly applies to some hysterical phantasms; but the 
explanation does not as yet seem attainable. My normal 


action. I tried to see faces, gardens, etc., but none came at 
command so long as I was under the influence of the drug. 
For the psychologist this agent should have value. To be 
able with a whole mind to experiment mentally upon such 
phenomena as I have deseribed is an unusual privilege. Here 
is unlocked a storehouse of glorified memorial treasures of 
one kind. There may be a drug which shall so release a mob 
of verbal memories, or of musical records, or, in fact, of tastes 
and odours. ‘I naturally speak of things seen under mescal 


these visions was altogether outside of my known experiences 
—but everything was excessive—forms were gigantic—colours 
marvellously intermingled. In fact, nothing was simply the 
vision of a thing remembered and recognised except the 
familiar Newport Beach. 

I see no obvious therapeutic uses for meseal in massive 
doses. It is yet to be tested by continuous employment in 
moderate amounts, and may be of value. 





this was more severe aud more lasting. 





Tsought so to limit the influence of mescal as to remain in full 


power to summon visions was entirely lost under mescal ' 


influence as glorified memories—certainly nothing seen in ~~ 








Tae Barrisn 
1628 MepicaL JouRNAL 


ANHELONIUM LEWINII. 


[Dec, 55 1896, 








ossession of all my faculties. The larger doses secure, as 
Dr. Prentiss has shown, more remarkable results, but may 
lessen the power to observe and to comment. I should dread 
a little lest excessive amounts might leave too permanent 
effects. In fact, I constantly carried for days a quite vivid 
image of one of these jewel clusters, seeing it mentally 
whenever my mind was turned upon the subject of my 
visions. 

I could match this also by a painful experience of some 
years ago, but I have said enough to show the great interest 
of this drug for physicians and psychologists. I predict a 
perilous reign of the mescal habit when this agent becomes 
attainable. The temptation to call again the enchanting 
magic of my experience will, I am sure, be too much for some 
men to resist after they have once set foot in this land of 


7“ fairy colours, where there seems to be so much to charm and 


so little to excite horror or disgust. 

Were I to take mescal again I should dictate to a steno- 
grapher all that I saw and in due order. No one can hope to 
remember for later record so wild a sequence of colour and of 
forms. But since to talk does not disturb these visions, a 
perfect account might easily be given. No one has told us 
what visions come to the Red man. I should like to know if 
those of the navvy would be like those of the artist, and 
above all, what those born blind could relate; and, too, such 
as are born colour blind. In fact, a valuable range of experi- 
ment is here to be laid open. 

I append to my own statement that of Dr. Eshner, one of 
the clinical staff of the Infirmary for Nervous Disease. It 
will be seen that, although the symptoms were not unlike my 
own, there were some interesting differences. There was 
nausea, whereas I had none; there was no distinct headache, 
whilst mine was notable. In general the experience was in 
Dr. Eshner’s case more unpleasant than in mine or in those 
Dr. Prentiss has reported, neither were the visions so remark- 
able nor the colours as vivid as were thoseI saw. It is as 
well to add, as concerns my own statement, that when twice 
in my life, I have had to take hypodermic injections of 
morphine for several successive nights, the drug ceased to 
cause sleep after the third night. Later it gave rise to 
visions of very remarkable character, which I have else- 
where described. These were seen whether or not the eyes 
—- closed, if only the room in which I lay was entirely 
dark. 

Dr. Eshner writes me as follows: From doses varying from 
10 to 50 drops I noticed no effect other, perhaps, than slightly 
diminished frequency of the pulse. Thus, an hour after 
taking 20 drops the pulse had fallen from 80to 70. Fifteen 
minutes after a dose of 50 drops the pulse had fallen from 82 
to 69, although in fifteen minutes more it was again 74. ‘The 
same effect was noticed after larger doses. 

On May 30th, at 3.50 p.M., with a pulse of 78, I took a fluid 
drachm. At 4.25 P.M.my pulse was 73,and I took another 
fluid drachm. At 4.45 my pulse was 65, and I took a third 
fluid drachm. At 5 p.M., with a pulse of 61, I took 40 minims, 
all of the preparation I had left. At 5.15 my pulse was 59; 
at 5.30, 64; and at 6.30, 65. 

As the constitutional facts appeared, I found I could not 
keep at serious work; I felt some distraction, and lacked my 
usual mental concentration. I soon began to feel badly, 
lapsing into a condition of general malaise, with not a little 
prostration, and had to give up any attempt at work, how- 
ever small. I found some comfort in lying down, and when 
my eyes closed I became conscious of a series of visual im- 
pressions, in most of which colour sensations were present. 
The pictures were characteristically kaleidoscopic, particu- 
larly as regards uniformity of arrangement. They changed 
frequently at times, like lantern pictures on a screen. The 
designs were various; some were Oriental, with stars and 
crescents, and points of light interspersed; others were 
mosaic in arrangement; some were screen-like; some fern- 
like ; some showed chased figures. Neither the images nor 
the light were very vivid, although as arule quite distinct. 
The intensity at times appeared related to the vigour with 
which the eyes were closed. 

At about 6.30 p.m. I arose and attempted to eat a little, but 
failed. Nausea was quite pronounced, and there was total 
loss of appetite. At no time did vomiting occur. 


a 
the visions were repeated. I had intended going out in the 
evening, and, in the hope of gaining relief, I equipped m self 
for a bicycle ride, and started off, despite my langour and 
general depression. I made my way to the Park without the 
slightest difficulty, and at Girard Bridge met and spoke to a 

acquaintance, stopped under the bridge to view the Memoria} 
Day illumination, and went on. I rode in all about ej ht 
miles, going down a fairly steep declivity with ease aM 
descending a longer and perhaps steeper declivity ’ with 
almost equal ease. I perspired en route, not unduly, but per- 
ceptibly. I felt that my pupils must be dilated from the 
brillianey of the light, with prismatic radiations and the 
large amount that entered my eyes. I think ocular accom- 
modation may also have been affected, although the visua) 
langour may have been only a part of the general langour 
Vision seemed not alert. I was ina state of placid indiffer. 
ence, free from enthusiasm, free from aspiration, without 
spontaneity. I imagine there was a little dryness of the 
secretions of the mouth and throat, because my voice ap- 
peared a little deeper and fuller than usual. I was scarcely 
conscious of ordinary movement, and felt as though I coulda 
scarcely make any extraordinary movement, although I was 
conscious of the necessity of making the effort, and of the 
increased exertion necessary in mounting the hill of which } 
have spoken. In general, however, I seemed to go on by 








virtue of my own momentum. In a figurative way, I felt as 
if I were of the same density as the medium in which I 
floated, so that I would yield to slight external physical im- 
pulses. The feeling is one that I can best describe as mus- 
cular insensibility or motor anesthesia. I was a little indif- 
ferent as to how I rode, yet not careless nor without a sense 
of responsibility, but 1 made little effort to avoid the rougher 
places, and appreciated very little jolting. I sustained my 
equilibrium perfectly, and was not compelled to dismount. 
other than intentionally. I rode slowly down Broad Street 
by the side of a four-in-hand, and listened with enjoyment to 
the strains of the trumpeter. I met a little messenger boy on 
a bieycle who made a ludicrous impression on me, and 
whom at his request [ helped to a match without dismount- 
ing. 

I reached home about half-past nine, and called at the 
house of Dr. 8S. Weir Mitchell, and in his absence left a note 
for him. I was more fortunate in finding Dr. J. K. Mitchel} 
at home, who noticed the deepening in my voice, dilatation 
of the pupils, some injection of the eyes, a little flushing of 
the face, increased knee-jerks and active muscle-jerks, a heart 
beat of 72, and, as he thought, some evident effort in speech. 
My own feeling was one of partial release of inhibition, of 
relaxation of restraint and of repression. The state was nota 
pleasurable, but rather a helpless one. I could write freely 
and with ease about what I had passed through and was 
passing through, and experienced a certain freedom and 
fluency of expression. 

I sat up and read from about ten until half-past twelve, the 
visions returning whenever I closed my eyesf/ Now I was 
again able to see all sorts of new designs, fresco work, 
porcelain decorations, tapestry figures, intricate laces, 
parquetry, diagrams, various kinds of scroll work, ete. I 
endeavoured to picture an American flag, but only partially 
succeeded after I liad retired, and then my flag was furled. 
saw coats of arms and shields and the like. All colours were 
represented. I looked especially for blue, as Dr. Mitchell 
had told me that he had seen all colours but blue, and I was 
successful. At one time I saw various shadows of green, and . 
at another especially purples, violets, lilacs, ete. In none 
of the images were people or animals or other objects than ~ 
designs represented. 

As I read I was easily pleased. At this time I experienced 








1 then lay down for half or three-quarters of an hour, and 





a sense of nausea, with a suggestion of burning and weight in 
the umbilical region; but this was gone by the following 
morning. . : 

Before going to bed I partook of a sandwich and some milk. 
I found the sense of taste benumbed. I was not able to fall 
asleep for some time. My sense of hearing seemed to be more 
receptive, but less acute. The condition might be described 
as an impairment of the auditory accommodation comparable 
to the corresponding ocular state. My breathing failed 
specially to attract my attention, but seemed shallow. I was 
conscious of pain on being pinched, 








| 






a ee ie eee ean lM ae ia a 6h re 








I 
y 
} 
B 
I 


| ‘yy ue we 





- especially when received from a distance. 





DEC. 5 1896. 


THE SERUM REACTION {IN TYPHOID FEVER. 





1629 


[ Tas Bair 
Mzpicat JounwaL 








oo 

The night was a restless one, with some snatches of sleep of 
varying length, but I arose with ease at the usual hour, feel- 
ing not much the worse for my late experiences, and not at 
allsleepy. There remained a sense of fulness in the head, 
put no other reminder, I partook of my usual breakfast with 
ordinary relish. The preparation had a disagreeable nauseous 
taste, with suggestion of pungency. 

