I'll tell you, play my cards right in the table, and I came into the research biased. I was very much against LSD. I happened to be an Irish American, and I liked to drink. As a middle-class teacher at Harvard, or at the University of California, I'd heard about marijuana, but I had no occasion to use it, because Beatnix used it. I didn't own a Beatnix, and they were people like Alan Ginsburg and Jack Carrick. They were having a lot of fun.
It was more fun than I was having, but there was no way I could get marijuana to be interested in it. Then we got involved up at Harvard, doing research in LSD, and I found out to my surprise that enormous numbers of young people were using marijuana, even Harvard students and graduate students.
Well, I have to laugh when I read about the problems of the dean at Harvard now, when the crimson announces that 70% of the freshman class smoked marijuana, and the dean has to announce that they'll throw people out of Harvard if they use marijuana, because seven years ago, I was saying exactly the same things to the people in our research project, because I didn't think we should study marijuana.
Because my contract with Harvard, until we were going to study LSD, which was legal in those days, amazing, just right away get it.
I didn't think it would be fair to mix marijuana up with LSD in our research, so I'd go around, just like the D's at Harvard, around our research projects in Newton or in Mexico, and I'd say,
Dad, you know, Lano Potsmokin in here. It wasn't a matter of fact until I left Harvard, and left institutional commitments that I decided I would do some research on marijuana.
But I actually didn't get around to doing it seriously until I went to India, and about the first week I was in India, I went to a place called a Gangeshop license in the city of Calcutta,
and I bought about four ounces of marijuana for a dime or so.
And I was with a holy man, a guru named Ahsoka Fakir, and he took me down to the Ganges River, and we sat there with a group of Shivaites sitting around the Bernie Gets,
and I really began to learn something about marijuana, and I was in India for five months, and I smoke marijuana every day, trying it out in different contexts.
And different activities. Now, this is the thing about marijuana. You see, marijuana, I'm sorry to say, might be a love of robots, a minipausal institute of technology.
There's no good and evil in this world. Marijuana is neither good nor bad, LSD is neither good nor bad.
As a matter of fact, there's probably no activity that you engage in from day to day a week to week that wouldn't be helped or hindered by the use of marijuana.
The scientific question is, which ones would be hindered? In which case, you don't ban marijuana, you just don't use the energy that way, and find out which activities to help in marijuana, and go down to the license, Ganges Shore in Cambridge Square and get it.
Now, I want to conclude my sermon with some comments about dropping out.
This at the moment tends to be the controversial part of the motto, turn on tuning and drop out.
Everyone nowadays accepts the notion of turning on, even Madison Avenue is telling you that Salem cigarettes will turn you on.
Everyone wants to be tuned in, but drop out. But you can't say drop out. You can't tell college students that you drop out of college.
You can't tell middle-aged people who have mortgage pay that you drop out of their jobs. I'm sorry. I didn't invent this. I'm just reading the lines that were given to me. You've got to drop out.
Now, there's a lot said about education. You've got to finish your education. When I hear that said, I shudder and my cells shrink because I'm sorry to say this.
This was great love and great affection because I'm part of this whole institution that we have going.
But the education system at the present time of the United States does neurological damage to the nervous system and functions as an arctic, addictive drug.
She shocks me to think about how we take our children. Our children who are born with 13 billion nerd cells, our children who are booties, born the final product up to date last minute version of a two billion year old assembly line back in some DNA Detroit, checking the new models, consumer research.
Hey, how's the weather up there? Ah, yes. The ice age is going back. All right, take a little more hair off the next model.
What colorized does she like this money on? Oh, blue. A little more blue in the next model. We were all born perfect right up to date month.
