What a tidy conventional people should. And your kids are going to say, hey, dad and mom, down in Greenwich Village, there's a new technique called electronic grain stimulation. And you're going to say, no implanting electrodes in my children's heads. And your kids will be growing pig tails. And you're going to get upset and say, why don't you use the old trident food methods of finding out where it's at like LSD.
Now, there's much confusion about the scientific status and the scientific evidence about LSD. And I'll say this quite flatly. There's no evidence that I know of, and I read the literature pretty carefully.
They can tell us very much about what LSD does to consciousness, or to the nervous system, or to the genetic material.
Anytime you hear anyone talking to you about LSD and pretending to give you scientific facts, whether they're pro or con LSD, I suggest that you be very skeptical.
I don't know whether LSD is good or bad. I don't know the effects of LSD on the nervous system, on the brain, or on the genetic material.
It's a gamble. It's a risk. The sacrament is always a risk. The new technique for expanding consciousness is always a risk.
Did you really think that it could be guaranteed for you? Hey, wake up. Have you forgotten who you are and where you came from?
That the whole thing is an adventure, and that you're from a long line of adventures. You've got into leaky boats and leaky crafts, and put strange things in their mouths, and put strange things in the ground.
Not quite knowing what they're doing. Yeah, taking a psychedelic chemical is a risk. Taking LSD is a risk. It's a gamble. It's Russian roulette.
But what isn't?
Can you name anything that you breathe or put in your body or let filter through the atmosphere, into your nervous system, like television waves, that aren't an unknown gamble?
And if all the Russian leaky games I see around me, including Vietnam, and polluted air, I would say that the Russian roulette of LSD is about the best gamble in the house.
To show you the difficult nature of the scientific study of LSD, I want to tell you a story of what happened with the scientific study of marijuana in the United States.
You know marijuana has been around a long time. Everyone has their mind made up about marijuana.
How many of you have ever read a scientific paper in a scientific journal following the customary checks and controls and language of science?
How many of you have evidence about marijuana as sound as evidence that you would expect that you'd have to have to base your opinions on any other aspect of the energy system around us?
As a matter of fact, you know, it's in possibly our states for the last 15 or 20 years to do scientific research at marijuana.
As there's a man in Anselinger back in the 30s who got Congress to pass a law saying that marijuana was bad.
Now, as Judeo Christians, we just have to have something that's bad.
It has to be communists, recipe witches, recipe devils, recipe possession, or the infidel of the pagan.
But we have to have something that's bad, and then we pass a law against it.
Now, the fact of the matter are that there were some studies done on marijuana, mainly in England, suggesting that marijuana could be useful as a psychiatric cure for depression, because it sure makes you feel good.
But for the last 15 years, it's been almost impossible to do research at marijuana.
If a full-fledged kosher bona fida scientist at an institute like this wanted to research at marijuana, he had to apply for a government license.
You know what happens if you apply for a government license?
Government inspectors come around and say, what do you want to do research at marijuana for?
You say, well, I want to find out what marijuana is about.
We know what it's all about. It's written in the law that it's all about.
Marijuana is an archaic addictive drug, and it causes rape, violence, aggression.
You're not certainly going to give MIT students in your laboratory marijuana.
Because what would the Massachusetts state legislature think about that?
It's been impossible to do research on marijuana.
I'd like to tell you a little research that I've done on marijuana.
And I want to...
