One evening this spring, as part of a student-run lecture series, two man-vide
for the souls of students who packed MIT's Cresky Auditorium. They were Dr. Timothy Leary,
founder of the League for Spiritual Discovery, which advocates LSD as a religious sacrament,
and MIT professor Jerome Letvin, who thinks of Dr. Leary as an agent of the devil. Timothy
Leary began experiments with LSD as a lecturer in psychology at Harvard, Harvard dismissed
him in 1963. He is now out on a $30,000 bond for possession of marijuana. Dr. Leary spoke
first, mainly in darkness, while psychedelic effects were projected on the screen behind
him. We have recreated these effects in color.
I am beginning tonight's ceremony by offering this chalice, which I am drinking to all
of us. The chalice contains a powerful and dangerous chemical given to me by the Boston
water supply. It's odorless, colorless, tasteless. It's addictive. As a matter of fact,
if you get hooked on it and they take it away from you, you crawl in your hands and knees,
and your tongue gets black, and your eyes bow. It's also a dangerous chemical. You have
to know how to use it, too much of it in wrong place, like in your lungs, and will kill
you. Ten feet of it coming over your rowboat. Maybe we should pass a law against it because
it's so dangerous and so addictive. Maybe only scientists should be allowed to play
with it. Or maybe we could learn how to teach our kids how to use it, in which case they'll
discover that water has many uses, and indeed has been used for thousands of years, for
billions of years, as a way of life. It's also been used for thousands of years as a
sacrament. Now you know what a sacrament is. A sacrament is a psychedelic technique. It's
something that you're used to get high. Get high? Yes. A sacrament is something that gets
you high. It gets you off the television stage set. Pretty solid here. Amazing how solid
they make these sets these days. It gets you off the fake prop television stage set of MIT
Cambridge Massachusetts United States America, and reminds you that you're not just a college
student. You're not just 22 or 23 or 24 years old. You're two billion years old. Had you
forgotten that? In fact, water can remind you where you came from. Remember you spent nine months
in a watery medium. First nine months, this trip on this planet. Remember all that sloshing?
Now, could we have the lights out now, please? I opened my ceremony. Could I have all the lights out, please?
You're going to see on the screen, home movies, and slide projections of little travels and
trips that we take. The slides give you the LSD experience from the inside and the movies present
the observers view of an LSD trip from the outside. The movies are unedited film that's been shot
minute after minute hour after hour during LSD.
