Title: Pluriverse: An Essay in the Philosophy of Pluralism
Author: Benjamin Paul Blood
Year: 1920
Source: https://archive.org/download/cu31924029019003/cu31924029019003_djvu.txt
Corpus note: Blood's late full exposition, with retrospective claims about the 1860 anesthetic insight and its philosophical consequences.

CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


ATE DUE


PHOJQ&tiPUl


PRINTED IN U.S.A.


Cornell University
Library


The original of tliis book is in
tlie Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029019003


PLURIVERSE


Tht Hound of Heaven is on bis oton trail, and the
vestige still lures the scent of a foregone conclusion


BENJAMIN PAUL BLOOD


PLURIVERSE

An Essay in the Philosophy of Pluralism

BY

BENJAMIN PAUL BLOOD

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
HORACE MEYER KALLEN, Ph.D.


BOSTON

MARSHALL JONES COMPANY
1920


COPYRIGHT- 1920
BY MARSHALL JONES COMPANY


THE-FLIUFTOH-FSESS
MOKWOOD-MjkSS-r-S-A


TO MY FRIEND

SPENCER KELLOGG


AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

IT was in the year 1860 that there came to me,
through the necessary use of anaesthetics, a
Revelation or insight of the immemorial Mys-
tery which among enlightened peoples stiU. persists
as the philosophical secret or problem of the world.
It is an illumination of the cosmic centre, in which
that field of thought where haunt the topics of fate,
origin, reason and divinity glows for the moment in
an inevitable but hardly communicable appreciation
of the genius of being; it is an initiation, histor-
ically realized as such, into the oldest and most inti-
mate and ultimate truth. Whoever attains and re-
members it, or remembers of it, is graduated beyond
instruction in "spiritual things"; but to those who
are philosophically given it wiU recur as a condition
which, if we are to retain a faith in reason, should
seem amenable to articulate expression, for it is
obviously what philosophers fail of.

After fourteen years of this experience at varying
intervals, I published in 1874 "The Anassthetic Reve-
lation and The Gist of Philosophy," not assuming
to define therein the purport of the illumination, but
rather to signalize the experience, and in a resume
of philosophy to show wherein that had come short
of it. My brochure was indifferently reviewed, ex-
cept that William James treated it seriously in the
Atlantic Monthly. But afterward submitting it to

vii


viii AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

the poet Tennyson, I immediately received from the
laureate a cordial and explicit confirmation out of
his own occasional abstractions, while not in a fully
normal state, yet impressing me as likely to be
of identical illumination. Many other responses
came to me in the course of time, announcing simi-
lar strangely inexpressible memories, until I learned
that nearly every hospital and dental oflSce has its
reminiscences of patients who, after a brief anaes-
thesia, uttered confused fragments of some inarticu-
late import which always had to do with the mystery
of life, of fate, continuance, necessity and cognate
abstractions, and all demanding "What is it?"
"What does it all mean, or amount to?" Such is
what is known esoterically, or among its compara-
tively few illuminati, as the anaesthetic revelation.

I let it drift along for years, for there seemed
nothing to be made of it, or out of it, excej)t that it
drove me more and more to the realization of phil-
osophy as "of all our vanities the motliest," while
yet the confirmations of the homogeneity of the ex-
perience came faster and more various.

For there comes a wondrous and congratulatory
sense of reminiscence with the experience itself,
which exalts this immediate mental phenomenon to
the solemnity of fate and prehistoric necessity; a
sense of life and the world falling of its own weight
into the vacuity of the future, rather than as an
ejected superfluity or surfeit of the past; a sense
that it was always so, and has to be so. It is this
reminiscence of the imimemorial, the "time out of
mind," which only later could have become the
Adamic and aboriginal, that makes it supernally the


AUTHOR'S FOREWORD ix

Revelation. It is this, too, that secularizes the an-
cient mystery, and leaves it congenital and familiar
with the humor and pathos of life; that gives the
weirdness and thrill to occasions of birth and death
and marriage; that makes the rustic halt and keep
his countenance at the most absurd occurrence;
that puts a sting of danger into the homeliest of
proverbs ; that makes us cheer when the awkward
horse wins the race, and when Portia's picture is
found in the leaden casket ; when fair Titania yields
the flower of her cheek to the hairy and grotesque
Bottom; when we call the heaven-inspired weak-
minded person a "natural."

This singular insight obviously belongs to, or im-
plicates or calls for, what is known as philosophy.
But turning thereto, one finds philosophy itself in
such a vagarious and unsettled condition, as having
no tribunal nor generally acknowledged authority,
that its promiscuous precepts have no judicial stand-
ing. In fact, philosophy, at least of the unprofes-
sional sort, has largely deserted the field whereon
alone this topic can be exploited. What it most
needs is language; but almost disqualifying logic,
philosophy seems to have turned for light and guid-
ance to biology and the inarticulate instincts of mere
life.

The plain truth is that the modern student of phil-
osophy has been baffled, daunted and discomfited by
a fake esotericism, arbitrarily technical in terms and
presiunptions, wholly problematical in its own cote-
ries — delighting, as Kant protested, in the confu-
sion of the plain man. The thoughtful spirit finds
the interest of the problem unabated, although so


X AUTHOR'S FOREWORD

many novelties invite the popular attention that
there is left even for him but little of that fine old
leisure in which philosophy was once the pride and
the prestige of the race.

It is this problem, and the Revelation of it, which
is the import and background of my book.

In the popular sense the book begins with a propo-
sition of positive science, one that the astronomers
rarely consider, although it involves the determining
element in all their wonderful calculations, the prop-
osition that a numerical or limited set of movable
stars, pervaded by a uniform attraction, would all
come together in one conglomerate mass ; and that
those which we do observe must be either held apart
by others still beyond them, and these others still by
others indefinitely without end, or else by some arbi-
trary and superstitious and unscientific agency.

And the fact is clearly apparent, to common sense,
that if the stars in their multitude do thus go on and
on interminably, there can be no comprehension nor
comprehender of them as a whole, or as a one, or as
all ; and that no pressure or formation or manage-
ment can come to them from without. But this in-
ference, seemingly so sure, is conditioned upon the
natural understanding that the space which con-
tains the stars would go on, whether with or with-
out them; and this understanding has been rudely
shaken by "idealism," a doctrine that outer things
are at least partly determined by the knowing of
them, and that space is not physical extensity, but
mental or spiritual freedom to extend.

This doctrine (which Mr. Herbert Spencer rankly
characterized as insanity) badly shatters the in-


AUTHOR'S FOREWORD xi

tegrity of all objective things; and it is abetted
scientifically by the microscope — for instance in the
important matter of size — showing that all sizes
are determined by the lenses of vision, which they
surely are. Color and form and tangibility also are
found to be referable to organic structure; the dif-
ference of things is not a property of things them-
selves, etc., so that for an explanation of vision and
distinction and space we have to go behind both
the eye and the mind, to "metaphysics."

And although reality as a whole (a one, an all, or
totality) may not be known by a comprehension from
without — since full comprehension must include
the spirit which comprehends — ^ yet the psycholo-
gists insist that it can be comprehended from within
by self -relation ; that it is at once in-itself and for-
itself, a subject-object, and they appeal to the com-
mon "self -consciousness" as its empirical proof.

All these topics have long since been treated with
a desperate persistence and an astonishing ingenuity,
which have necessitated and must condone the pos-
sibly tiresome chapters which follow. But however
these chapters may disqualify the philosophy of the
past, they do not assume to replace it by a better on
the same lines. The leading expectation of this book
is to signalize the anaesthetic revelation.

The most overt and beaten path into philosophical
curiosity is at its division of reality into static and
dynamic, as these notions are exemplified in eternity
and time, and in the duplexity of the one and the
many. To this duplexity we now devote our first
working chapter.

Benjamin Paul Blood.


CONTENTS

CBAFTEK PAGE

Introduction xv

I. DuPLExnr i

II. Idealism 38

III. Monism 65

IV. Cause 88

V. Self-Relation no

VI. The Negative 156

VII. Ancillary Unity and the Present

Tense 172

VIII. Jesus and Free Will 182

IX. The Anesthetic Revelation . . . 204
Supplementary Essay; The Poetical

Alphabet 246


sill


INTRODUCTION


WHEN, in As You Like it, Shakespeare
makes Touchstone ask William, "Hast any
philosophy in thee, Shepherd?" the thing
that Touchstone means is a certain wisdom and
vision of life, serenity and resignation mingled, such
as Jacques possessed and Hamlet yearned for, and
whose perfect example in the works of Shakespeare
is Prospero. Its varieties in the tradition of
European thinking are not numerous, systems of
philosophy exhibiting always the temper of serenity
or of resignation, with the missing member of the
twain replaced by acquiescence or ecstasy or sorrow
or security or bitterness. The overruling quality
in each system, the essential of its tone, no matter
what its type, is tranquillity. The mind may be that
of Seneca or of Schopenhauer; in and through its
philosophy it has found repose, its problems solved,
its seekings successfully at end.

This aspect of the temper of philosophy has, how-
ever, another side, a complement psychologically and
historically antecedent, logically later, a sort of
father-brother who divides the mastery of the house
of thought. Philosophy is a quest no less than it
is an attainment, a battle no less than it is a peace.
Its wont is that of an appetency and a yearning,

XV


xvi INTRODUCTION

as its use is that of a fulfilment which is the con-
summation and dissolution of appetency and yearn-
ing. Its history is of system replacing system,
argument argument, in the ambition to affirm that
state of enlightenment and security which outlaws
both system and argument, and constitutes what
Benjamin Paul Blood, the subject of this essay,
calls "the satisfaction of philosophy." There is, as
he truly perceives, a satisfaction beyond philosophy
which philosophy seeks, which only philosophy can
seek, and which, it may be ventured, only philosophy
can attain. To the relation between that satis-
faction and the hungry reasoning that pursues it
there pertains a high comedy, perhaps the most
piteous and ironic of all the comedies into which the
human spirit propels itself. It is the comedy of a
deliverance, whereof, always, "the rest is silence."
There is hardly a supremely great thinker who does
not exemplify it. Plato, aiming by dialectic at pos-
session of the absolute good which is the ineffable
repudiation of all dialectic; Plotinus, at endless
trouble to demonstrate the indemonstrability of the
ineffable One ; St. Thomas, Spinoza, Hegel, Bergson,
any philosopher you will; each is in one way or
another at great pains to reason out the ultimate
nescience of reason, the swallowing up and termina-
tion of reason : to reason out a state where the act of
reasoning no longer signifies and its end and be-
ginning are joined in one. The attainment of this
state is somehow an initiation. Its being is a mys-
tery. Its attributes are totality and eternity and
goodness. Its apprehension is a revelation of the
instancy of time, of the interpenetrative simultaneity


INTRODUCTION xvii

of the primary and the ultimate inwardness of be-
ing, of nature at once immemorial and inveterate,
the first thing and the last thing, and the real es-
sence of man.

Much of the ratiocination of the philosophic
tradition consists of recounting the aliency of man-
kind from this, its proper essence, and of providing
the instruments ,andthe technique of its self-recovery.
Sometimes these instruments are forged and au-
thorized by the discrediting of reason and the justi-
fication of faith or instinct or intuition. Some-
times they are provided by the transmutation of
reason itself. But however they are fabricated,
their use is to establish and sustain a security
already assumed, regarding the goodness, the unity
and the eternity of being, and requiring rather the
rejection of its contraveners than its own demon-
stration. Ultimately, this security is the ultimately
desirable revealing its self, and in the act convicting
those whom it illuminates of its veridiction. It is
ever an object of faith rather than of proof, and
faith, as Mr. Blood says in the "Anesthetic Reve-
lation," "comes not by doubtful tests, but is ever a
foregone conclusion."

It is such a foregone conclusion that Mr. Blood
pursues. His pursuit differs in many important re-
spects from the traditional one. But most of all
in this — that he makes it knowingly. "The Hound
of Heaven," he declares in his device for Pluri-
verse, "is on his own trail, and the vestige still
lures the scent of a foregone conclusion." What he
means — and takes the whole of this one book to say
— is that the mystery of existence is not a hidden


xviii INTRODUCTION

thing like a face behind a mast, but is existence
itself, its actual process, both as search and as satis-
faction. That, therefore, men seek what they al-
ready possess, like a dog hunting its own tail.
There is nothing behind, Mr. Blood would reiterate.
The face and the heart of being are in identical
place and of identical substance ; men are self-deluded
when they attempt, as philosophers or otherwise, to
uncover an essence or a principle different in nature
from that which science apprehends or the daily life
encounters. And he would say it as one speaking
with authority, authority ineluctable as the "anaes-
thetic revelation," its source and sanction, wherein,
at the moment of awakening from anaesthetic sleep,
there gets accomplished that "stare of being at
itself," of which all revelation must consist. The
reliance on experience of this kind, which can be
suggested, pointed to, designated, perhaps even
shared — "signalized" is Mr. Blood's word — but
cannot as yet be analyzed or described, makes of him
a mystic; and indeed his doctrine abounds in the
qualities wherewith mysticism is distinguished — not-
ably the rejection of ratiocination as the ground for
security, the warranting of security upon ineffable
experience, the subsequent use of ratiocination to
persuade of the inescapable authority of this ex-
perience. But also, Mr. Blood's teaching in certain
respects differs from the mystic type to the point
of uniqueness. He holds the revelation, overwhelm-
ingly convincing as it is, a thing coimnonplace and
secular, confirming instead of outlawing, the daily
life of men. The world it yields him seems some-
what ambiguous, but it is a "pluriverse" far more


INTRODUCTION six

definitely than a "universe." In a word, Mr. Blood
IS a mystic of the commonplace, his certainties are
certainties of the ineffable truth and reality of
the changeful flux and disparity and multiplicity cit
the daily life.

The latter variation from the tradition particu-
larly impressed WiUiam James. Discussing Mr.
Blood's philosophy in the Hibbert Journal (July,
1910) he celebrated him as a "pluralistic mystic."
"The practically unanimous tradition of 'regular'
mysticism," he wrote, "has been unquestionably
monistic; and inasmuch as it is the characteristic
of mystics to speak, not as the scribes, but as men
who have *been there' and seen with their own eyes,
I think that this sovereign manner must have made
some other pluralistic-minded students hesitate, as
I confess that it has often given pause to me. One
cannot criticise the vision of a mystic — one can but
pass it by, or else accept it as having some amount
of evidential weight. I felt unable to do either with
a good conscience until I met with Mr. Blood. His
mysticism, which may, if one likes, be understood
as monistic in this earlier utterance (the Anaesthetic
Revelation) develops in the later ones a sort of 'left-
wing' voice of defiance, and breaks into what to my
ear has a radically pluralistic sound." This sound
is somewhat tempered in "Pluriverse," but it is reso-
nant and definitive enough to justify the book's title,
even though the existence it designates is not shown
with certainty to be either monistic or pluralistic.


XX INTRODUCTION


II


The causes of Mr. Blood's divergence and novelty
are more easily guessed at than accounted for.

They were not in variety of scene and society.
He hardly ever ventured far from home. Born in
the second decade of the last century, most of his
long life of eighty-six years was spent in and about
the dingy town of Amsterdam, New York. He held
almost as close to his native scene as Kant and there
was as little therein to motivate and to explain his
thinking as there was in Konigsberg to explain the
latter's. His life is marked by a normality unusual
in a mystic. Neither do his ancestry nor his educa-
tion enlighten us. His breed was Scotch-Irish, that
pre-Revolutionary type of tough mind, obstinate will
and rigid faith which had early in the eighteenth
century been driven by famine from Ulster to these
shores. It carried with it a resentment against Brit-
ain which animated the Revolution and saved it from
disintegration during more than one crisis. It im-
ported a pattern of congregational organization that
influenced the form of polity which, after the Revo-
lution, the country adopted. These things aside, it
was not further distinguished. It had the normal
endowment of practical competency in affairs, and
speculative regularity in theology. The bulk of it
pioneered, constituting the westernmost wave of the
European strain that has now won and possessed
the North American continent. A percentage set-
tled, took root, found an equilibrium of life capable
of transmission and continuity, and used up its sur-
plusages of energy in feud, evangel or philosophy.


INTRODUCTION


XXI


The descendants of this percentage are to be found,
from its migratory beginnings to the present day, all
along the Appalachian range, from the Adirondacks
and Catskills to the Ozarks. Thus, the ancestral
farm, situated in the town of Florida, had been in the
possession of the Blood family some one hundred and
thirty years when it came at last in the hands of
Benjamin Paul, to work as his fathers had worked
it before him, for the family's provision and con-
tinuance. His education appears to have been as
normally American as his breed — the public schools
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Academy, a period at
Union College. No precocity is recorded beyond a
far from unusual speculative propensity in adoles-
cence, a sensibility to language, and the itch of au-
thorship. The last seems to have found relief in
letters to such locally-known newspapers as the Am-
sterdam Gazette or Recorder, the Utica Herald, the
Albany Times. The letters dealt with an astonishing
diversity of subjects, from local petty politics or the
tricks of spiritualistic mediums to principles of
industry and finance and profundities of metaphy-
sics. Almost the whole of Blood's mental life, from
his eighteenth year to his eighty-sixth, has found
record and expression in these letters. The qualities
of thought and style which had attracted William
James to him, appear, prior to 1874!, to have been
but foreshadowed in them. Their fulness seems
to have come into being only with the composition of
"The Anaesthetic Revelation."

Nor does the range of Mr. Blood's independent
reading appear to have been wide. His references
and allusions show an intimate knowledge of Shake-


xxu


INTRODUCTION


speare and of Plato, and a customary familiarity
with the Bible. He has read the German philoso-
phies current during his young manhood — notably
Hegd. He is conversant with Hegelians at home and
abroad. He knows the American transcendentalists,
particularly Emerson, to whom he defers. He has
sharp things to say about W. T. Harris, quondam
Commissioner of Education, for whose Journal of
Speculative Philosophi/ he rewrote^ a number of
philosophical letters, and he pounds the "Universol-
ogy" of Stephen Pearl Andrews as if it were impor-
tant. On the other hand, he is, after 1874!, in
epistolary contact with a great many men of personal
eminence and literary distinction — with Stirling, the
English interpreter of Hegel, with Edmund Gurney,
with Sir William Ramsay, with James, with Emerson,
with Tennyson. Most of the correspondence touches
the inwardness of the anaesthetic revelation. Mr.
Blood had sent about copies of this tract — printed,
like aU his things except his letters, at his own ex-
pense — and for a time conducted an extensive cor-
respondence anent its subject-matter. The exchange
of letters led in cases eventually to a circulation —
in the instance of William James to an exchange —
of photographs, and to subsequent amenities of
which two are evidential : Tennyson's "the face is that
of one born to grapple with difficulties metaphysical
and other," and James's, "I am so delighted to find
that a metaphysician can be anything else than a
spavined, dyspeptic individual fit for no other use."
It may be that the constitutional vigor recorded
by the photographs is the beginning and end of the
idiosyncracy of Blood's genius. He is declared never


INTRODUCTION xxlii

in the course of his long life to have known illness
of any kind or to have been confined to his bed as
an invalid. He is that unusual event in the tradi-
tion of mysticism and metaphysics, a healthy mystic.
The point of departure for his mysticism seems to
have been an anassthesia induced by nitrous oxide
or ether. Its effect on him was not unlike that of
a religious conversion. The experience which came
in waking from this artificial slmnber reset his con-
sciousness and made of him a poet and philosopher
and mystic. His first and most beautiful attempt
to signalize it he composed at the age of forty-two
as "The Anaesthetic Revelation," after, he declares,
"experiments ranging over nearly fourteen years."
His second and final attempt is "Pluriverse," a modi-
fication, expansion and elaboration of the essen-
tials of the first. The interval between them is filled
with letters to the press, letters and stiU more let-
ters (signed mostly "Paul"), a poem or two, the
more or less volinninous correspondence already men-
tioned, and the quiet almost anonymous life in Am-
sterdam, New York. He was waiting, he wrote his
friends, waiting for the necessary terms and ex-
pressions, fearful always of being "too soon at last."
He had high hopes of what might come of an ade-
quate expression of his insight : "Thus you may see,"
he declared in a letter to the Springfield Republican
shortly after William James had died, "that this
mimibling and mouthing mystery of the cosmos still
hovers over hospital and laboratory, awaiting articu-
lation; like the wild hawk of Walt Whitman, un-
tamed and as yet untranslatable, it sounds its bar-
baric yawp over the books of the world. If I can


xxiv INTRODUCTION

express it, as I may in a year or two, or in a decade
or two, as it shall happen, my book will be more than
one of the 'Books of the Week,' for therein the fact
may appear that Sinai and Calvary were but sacred
stepping-stones to this secular elevation where free
thought may range hereafter, when the old scares of
superstition shall have vanished to the limbo whence
they came."

As a matter of fact the composition of "Pluri-
verse" took nearly a decade. What feU between it
and "The Anaesthetic Revelation" appears to have
mattered little. Both essays signalize the same essen-
tial experience. Each sucks up from the philosophic
atmosphere of its generation the prevailing meta-
physical tone. In each this tone is tempered by a
certain resilient straitness which is of the unrelent-
ing taste and predisposition of "Paul" alone. By
these the monism of the "Ansesthetic Revelation" is
keyed down with the observation that "each and
every one of us is the One that remains." By these
the high flights of Hegelian rationalism of the same
document are made to culminate in the pronounce-
ment that "the naked life is realized outside of sanity
altogether; and it is the instant contrast of this
'tasteless water of souls' with formal thought as we
'come to' that leaves in the patient an astonishment
that the awful mystery of Life is at last but a homely
and a common thing." By these, again, the pluralism
of "Pluriverse" is mitigated with the hope "that the
fond monism that we have dialectically disparaged
may be at least transcendentally rehabilitated." As
the monism is a reverberation of the transcenden-
talism current in the latter half of the nineteenth,


INTRODUCTION xxv

so the pluralism is an absorption of the Jamesian
metaphysic of the twentieth century. Analogously,
as the gist of philosophy was declared to have been
confirmed or paralleled in revelation during the sev-
enties and eighties of the last century, so it is, in its
intellectualistic aspects, both required and rejected
in the generation of James and Bergson. Whatever
the age, the conclusion — foregone — is the Revela-
tion, "given you as the old Adamic secret, which you
then feel that aU intelligence must sometime know or
have known ; yet ludicrous in its familiar simplicity,
as somewhat that any man should always perceive
at his best, if his head were only level, but which in
our ordinary thinking has grown into a thousand
creeds and theories dignified as religion and phil-
osophy."


in

If, in his serene obscurity, Mr. Blood can be said
to have had a vocation, it was to celebrate this reve-
lation "ludicrous in its familiar simplicity." His
style as celebrant has the hymnic quality, and the
meaning of his diction — particularly when most
metaphysical or when closest to the revelation —
that tang of suggestion and overtone which ally it
to the utterance of feeling by music rather than to
the denotation of ideas by words. This quality he
shares with all mystics, as is natural he should. The
range and the depth of the mystical experience, its
completeness of emotional transformation and intel-
lectual readjustment, the total loosening and over-
turning of the psyche which the experient under-


XXVI INTRODUCTION

goes, cannot fail to initiate in any man or woman a
mode of rhythmic vocalization and imaginative state-
ment at once exalted and colorful. But here again
Slood varies from the type in that the power of
such utterance is in his work something more than
occasional. His style is conscious, not reflex, an
•effect of will rather than of passion. He is not, as
his reader must see, a constructive writer, even in
a, work so sustained as "Pluriverse" ; James describes
him as "aphoristic and oracular rather . . . some-
times dialetic, sometimes poetic and sometimes mystic
in his manner, sometimes monistic and sometimes
pluralistic in his matter." Nevertheless there is that
even in his dryest passages which never fails to cap-
ture heart and ear with a felicity of cadence and of
precision that points to the disciplined mastery of
medium attainable only through the training and
perfecting of a gift inborn. Blood, like Poe, has a
philosophy of style, a far profounder and more
subtle philosophy, with declared affinities to the ob-
servations of Burns and of Swedenborg and the sug-
gestive analysis that Plato made in the "Cratylus."
The ideas constituting this analysis appear to have
occurred to Mr. Blood altogether spontaneously,
when he was a young man just out of his teens. They
are incorporated in the Supplementary Essay to
*'Pluriverse" under the title "The Poetical Alpha-
bet."

That the subject-matter of the essay is not remote
from the preoccupations of the book is conclusively
established with the declaration that "logical truth
is held to the arbitrament of language, the produc-
tion and determination of which are therefore of


INTRODUCTION xxvii

prime importance in philosophical explanation."
And forthwith the problem is attacked in the form of
the question "why the word icicle is not a fit name
for a tub." Its answer is an exhibition, not an an-
alysis or an explanation, of felt and observable har-
monies between things and the names of things. These
names, in their sound and in their form, are some-
how the reverberations and the shadows of the things
they stand for. How, Mr. Blood has not been at
pains to work out, and perhaps never was equipped
to do so. The matter is one for the precise technique
of the psychological laboratory. But its principle
— the rule underlying observations of writers so
diverse as Plato and Swedenborg and Burns and
Blood, and tongues so different as Greek and Swedish
and English — however difficult to demonstrate,
should not be difficult to state. It might be formu-
lated as follows: The human organism, as a unit
and in its separate organs, is something like a sound-
ing-board. Knowingly or unknowingly it as a rule
responds to, refracts and gives back whatever stim-
ulus impinges upon it. The specific responses and
reproductions which it is conscious of are only a
tiny fraction of the generalized reverberations which
it is not conscious of. There are "emotion," con-
stantly modifying the breathing and the state of
the vocal chords and of the other organs involved in
the production of sound and speech. Now between
all bodily activities and their causes and occasions
both physiologists and psychologists have observed
a certain vibrational similarity, or even identity.
This is most noticeable in both conscious and un-
conscious imitations of rhythms and movements, but


xxviii INTRODUCTION

it is to be observed as well in such unnormal expe-
riences as color-audition. In those experiences sound
seems to be translated into and accompanied by
color ; it is this order of succession which renders the
experience unnormal. But the reverse succession, in
which color is translated into and accompanied by
sound, incipient or actual, is far more frequent. In-
deed, it is an vmobserved commonplace of the daily
life. It takes place, moreover, not merely with
respect to color, and movement, but with respect to
line and shape as well. What is seen is also sounded ;
it is the unheard melody sweeter still. And there-
fore icicle is not a fit name for a tub and "each of
the sounds represented by several letters of the al-
phabet is specially effective in conveying a certain
significance; and wherever language is popular and
happy it is so in accord with these early intuitions."
"These early intuitions" are synonymous with the
transmutive sensibility of any word-master to the
fugitive phases of the changing world about him;
they are the initial endowment of the poet. And Mr.
Blood was a poet, whether he wrote verse or wrote
prose.^

1 James, in "A Pluralistic Mystic," quotes from Blood's
"Apostrophe to Freedom," his "Nemesis," and from "The
Lion of the Nile." The latter two were printed, through
James's interest, in Scribner's Magazine, 1888 and 1889. "The
Lion of the Nile" is a very remarkable piece of writing both
for thought and diction. Concerning the former it is worth
while quoting a letter from Blood to James, dated March 31,
1887: "I have a letter from Dr. Stirling — full of kindness,
and a shake of the head about the Lion; he sees much beauty,
etc., in it, but says: 'I am hopeless of the one thought which
coimects it altogether.' Damme but I will prove the connec-
tion, the potential connection, right here: — We all believe.


INTRODUCTION xxix

With Blood's sensibility to word-music there goes
also another quality not usually associated there-
with but having in fact, as Blood himself adum-
brated, connections as intimate as they are obscure.
This is logical skill, dialectic power. It came force-
fully under the attention of William James, review-
ing Blood in 1910, and what it has lost in vigor
since that date, readers of "Pluriverse" wUl concede,
it has gained in grace. Although "Pluriverse" gives,
within its wider structure, the total effect of a
mosaic rather than of an architectonic, there weaves
through the notable apothegms, reflections and imag-
inative flights into which it lifts again and again

poetically, in metempsychosis, and the Socratic reminiscence,
and the unity (Emei-sonian) of intelligence, whose idol is the
Sphinx. The poem says, for the spirit of championship, or
the champion spirit of the world: I drew my life from the
dugs of one that lived on blood alone, and my consciousness
is the accumulation [translation] of- many. I trace back
through the streams of this blood to episodes of individual
life (which ran together in the nulk of my aU-rapacious dam,
and be damned to her). I feel as Caesar felt — as Antony
and Cleopatra had gall enough to feel that Caesar felt. I
was Coriolanus, I was a gladiator. I was a condor — and
for the matter of that I was the whale that swallowed Jonah.
Will any call this pretence a dream? ..." If so, dignity and
freedom are, no less. As the poem concludes:

Nay, now it but the dream.
When things of greater h^rt and wider mould
And deeper life and patience here conspire
To claim this reminiscent verse a phase
Of the isiorld's championship. — Let he what may.
The gods are dreary as the worshippers;
As the wide cycles tire they too have changed.
Faint 'neath its newest garb of charity
Flutters the heart divine in these last years.
And low the purple trails, and justice stoops
To mercy weiaker than the sin forgiven;


INTRODUCTION

from levels of the commonplace, a swift and compe-
tent dialectic whose force and influence are of the
nature of overtone and suggestiveness rather than
of explicit conviction. They do not coerce by proof,
they persuade by implication. As in Blood's diction
Shakespeare, the Bible and the slang and vernacu-
lar current mingle their lights and invest with the
glow of strange familiarity new perspectives of
thought and feeling, so in his argument common-
places of illustration and habit are suffused with
indications of the ineffable, and grip and redirect,
without forcing, the mind: as when he says, speaking

Tet the patrician pride, the red disdain
Self-tmtenant — more graciom in its scorning
Than e'er, alas, Christ-love in pitying tears.
Remembers me on the Judean banners.
O'er lands Levantine rampant without peer;
The shuddering wilds grew firm; the haggard cliffs
Where conscience flings her troubled victims down.
Caught peace from my sane eyes; e'en vulgar life.
That knows no other charm, was great through me.

And still my worship lives in longing hearts.
Human or brute or bird, — for these are one
In love and longing, as my sphinxes know
That lie along the sands and watch the River.
Many are the altars but the flame it one;
Of every hell the misery is fear,
And every heaven is mockery but mine.

Doth thy pulse, quivering thro the pose of Ajax,

Defy the hirid blood of the strong gods

As one with them at last, and one with Mvm — ^

The longest wing in heaven, the deepest crown.

Who, ever vanquished, fighting as he falls.

Still proves himself immortal? —

Lo, it is I, the Lion of the Nile,

The mystery of the wingid human brute

Couchant — the CHAMPION spirit of the world.


INTRODUCTION xxxi

of the astonishment that the homeliness of his reve-
lation produces — "the astonishment is aggravated
as at a thing of course, missed by sanity in over-
stepping, as in too foreign a search, or with too
eager an attention: as in finding one's spectacles on
one's nose or in making in the dark a higher step
than the stair." Deliverances of this kind, again,
are naturally accompanied, according to the wont
and use of the mystic, with a certain lordly impa-
tience, a highhandedness in the discussion of the
opinions and teachings of other men, such, for ex-
ample, as Kant. But this is an incident.

Less incidental, because truly implicated in the
idiosyncrasy and personal flavor of the man is a
certain specific contemporary irrelevance. Mr.
Blood's contemporaneity is of atmosphere warmed
by personal glimpses, it is not of contact and com-
prehension of the living movements of the day.
Readers will miss reflection of the vivid and poign-
ant social concerns of the times; of the reticulated
conceptions of the new realistic philosophies and of
the momentous development and implications of the
biologic and physical sciences. What to other
readers is most coercive in Bergson's doctrine — the
ordered biological material — is negligible to Blood,
and his observations in physiology, and his one use
of physics in the argmnent for the endless manyness
of the world he set great store by, are naive. And
who shall say that there is any harm done? Firm
on the rock of his revelation, Blood, in but not of
an age that has prevailingly spoken from without
inward, speaks from within outward. His vocation
has been truly metaphysics ; he is a dialectician vindi-


xxxii INTRODUCTION

eating in ordered words a faith in which serene cer-
tainty and disillusion mingle and are one. Hear his
last word: "And now inexorable time admonishes
me to have done with this world. I am thankful at
having seen the show; and although after eighty-
five years, the stars are still flickering slightly, and
the winds are something worn, I am stiU clear and
confident in that religion of courage and content
which cherishes neither regrets nor anticipations."

IV

The overture to this finale is the exposure of
philosophy's incompetency and the enthronement of
the brute datum, the fact and givenness of being,
through the anaesthetic revelation, exfoliating in a
more pertinent philosophy. Mr. Blood begins his
exposure with the consideration of the well-known
antinomianisms, made familiar by Kant, of the tra-
ditional descriptions of the world. From the be-
ginning thinkers have built inwardly coherent and
mutually contradictory metaphysical systems. These
have been criticized by Kant and others, but their
critical review is itself only a dialetical negation of
their dogmatic grounds, and cannot, therefore, es-
tablish itself as having transcendental and hence
superior authority. Experience is self-contradic-
tory, and any proposition may be affirmed or denied
of it. Not, however, absolutely. This could be ab-
solutely so only if the world were truly static and
inalterable. But it is not that. Its staticism must
be proved; its dynamicism can be observed. The
oppugnance between the two works itself out em-


INTRODUCTION xxxiii

pirically, somehow, in favor of a cosmic doing. This
doing is a thing of chance and freedom, whose es-
sence may be apprehended in the unaccountable
gains of force or motion in the phenomenon of mo-
mentum, in the ineluctable infinitude of stars and
suns whose reciprocal outward pull alone could keep
them from falling together as the inward pull of
"gravitation" would compel any finite number of
them to fall toward a common centre. The gravi-
tational pull, the force or motion of momentum is
each an action which takes place. That it does
take place is a free gift or eventuation of being, a
chance, which as chance is the only sure thing : "The
reliability and permanence of chance are the most
consolatory elements of philosophy. The notion
that, left to chance, all would go wild and undepen-
dable, miscalculates experience and . . . calls for a
positive malignity to overweigh the jnst indifference
or stolidity or essential inertia of things in them-
selves. There needs a positive and peremptory why
the ace should come up an inconvenient number of
times. Justice is balance. The Good is not best,
upon the whole; it does not appear to have been
deserved, and it is unjust, by comparison, to the in-
different and the commonplace ; it shows heat in the
bosom of fate."

Nor do the static, the necessary, or the eternal
come off better through the demonstration of ideal-
ism. One aspect of the contentions of that way of
thinking, Mr. Blood maintains, is correct and com-
monplace. The mind's activity, or the body's, does
make a difference in the thing it acts on, and the
show and pageant of our living world cannot help


xxxiy


INTRODUCTION


being a show and pageant determined by our point of
view and the organs of our seeing. But once this
relativity is conceded, what then? The enterprises
of doing and thinking go on as spontaneously, as
inexorably, and as provokingly as before, demand-
ing explanation. Idealism has but given a back to
the pigment or added a frame to the picture. The
form, matter and articulation of the stuff upon the
canvas, the sequence of line, shape and color, the
whole processes, of the picture within the frame —
and these are the problem — have stiU to be ac-
counted for. Atlas may uphold the world, but the
order and connection of what takes place upon the
face thereof, or in its caverns underneath — what
have they to do with Atlas, or Atlas with them?
Idealism is no more competent to resolve duplexity
than any other idea of the tradition. Something
always escapes and stands out, a distinct and ineluc-
table Other to any system of inclusion that may be
formulated or felt. Each is an eventuation of
chance whose opposite might be equally good, and,
as it appears in the history of philosophy, seems so.
Thus with all monisms. Their psychological origi-
nal is the constitutional egoism of the spirit of man ;
their production is a process of limitation; their
ultimate nature must be that of "self -relation" (an
idea known to Mr. Bertrand Russell as "the class of
all classes" and rejected also by him as impossible)
in which the container is no addition to the con-
tained but identical with it, as men are supposed to
be self-identical when they know that they know.
Monism, it would appear, is but a recessional of the
philosophic problem which calls recession, solution.


INTRODUCTION xxxv

In the end, it also begs its datum and leaves it un-
explained. Its eifect, hence, has been that of "a
needless barrier to explanation," since where it does
not intervene that impulsion of being which we call
causation may be discovered and acknowledged im-
mediately at hand, as "in the self-respect of some
great emotion or agonism that should feel itself
worth while." But too much reliance must not be
placed in causation either. Also that is implicated
in self-relation, with its asserton that this is the
other, or that the different is the same, as when we
say water is hydrogen and oxygen. For this and the
other and different and same are all data, things
given, facts, to which "cause" is added, for the
assuagement of our unrest in their presence, as in-
ference pr explanation; and added^ not as increase
but as reduplication without increase, such redupli-
cation as is supposed to take place when you know
that you know. Such reduplication is no more than
"self-relation."

"Self-relation," in Mr. Blood's view, is the heart
and goal of all philosophy, its dialectic motive and
contemplative illusion. It is the "foregone con-
clusion," the begged question whereof the actuality
and potency are already assumed in its own proof.
Systems of philosophy are no more than such proof.
However else they may diiFer, they are alike involved
in the circular argument that, since cause and effect
must be somehow identical, being has to be its own
ground; that difference, therefore, is the same as
identity, negation as affirmation: reality is its own
other and all relation is self-relation. Whether you
think of this relation as the identity of knowing with


xxxvi INTRODUCTION

what is known; or, after the fashion of the theo-
logians, as the identity of the mover with the moved,
the causer with the caused; or, after the fashion of
the metaphysicians, as the identity of past, present
and future and the instantaneity of time, you do
not, by the use of it, solve the problem of being and be-
coming: you only delay and postpone it, you pass
the buck to God. "The grudge of science as against
the pretense of self-relation is that our highest claim
and achievement, namely, knowledge, is therein made
to countenance with its fuU authority and signifi-
cance a claim to have attained the comprehension
and mastery of that which halts our curiosity, con-
trols our interest, and occasions our discontent, while
in fact it does not fundamentally understand the
least and simplest thing in the world. Our conscious-
ness, even as it glows, is a helpless projection from
an alien energy, bottomless in its regard, utterly
unqualified to declare or to determine anything as
necessary, and therefore wholly incompetent to radi-
cal explanation."

What, when "self-relation" is discredited, is there
that remains competent to "radical explanation?"
Nothing. At various instants in the European tra-
dition philosophers have seized upon this nothing,
have made a principle of it, and used it as an in-
strument of explanation. The foremost among
them was Hegel, who, resting his dialectic upon the
dogma that being and not being are the same, agreed
that "the vitality of the negative is essentially the
life of being and that negation is positive in its
results." Hegel and his kind have, however, been
merely deluded by the feeling that nothing, as a word.


INTRODUCTION xxxvii

is something, and have attributed to the discursive
substantiality of the term a metaphysical potency
that is merely fanciful, like the potency of any shib-
boleth. Sesame, which opens doors in the fairy
story, opens no doors in fact. There is noth-
ing in negativity: non-entity is a thing purely
verbal and logical, a topic in dialectic. What force
it has accrues to it only by reason of "its positive
given force," as the force of the wind on the sail of
a tacking ship, whereby it goes in the wind's own
face. The diversification and richness of existence
does not need for its explanation the equilibrium of
contradictories, of "entity" and "non-entity." "Con-
trast may come as well from new excess in nature
as from the negation and non-being of the passing
and the past." There is, and there comes to be, dif-
ference and distinction without antagonism: "being
gets vital distinction in the oncoming future and
becomes itself the negative or background in a world
new-born. . . . There is no struggle for mere being.
. . . but rather the bounty of a miraculous becom-
ing, ever new, and ever more."

Does then, with monism discredited, idealism
doubtful, the negative incompetent, the world stretch-
ing indefinitely anywhere, ever exceeding, exceeding,
exceeding, its Midst everywhere, does then duplexity
dichotomize existence into confusion, and is the last
word of thought, agnosco? Not for Mr. Blood. If
analysis and dialectic do not reveal an organic and
absolute cohesion of the world's multifariousness, ob-
servation compels the recognition — nevertheless —
of a certain "ancillary unity" of being, a certain
contact and mutual interplay or interpretation of


XXXVUl


INTRODUCTION


the diversity of existences. If the universe is not a
block, neither is it a chaos. There are no absolutes
in it: "contradiction cannot utterly contradict nor
can being exclusively be." The very essence of "the
bounty of miraculous becoming" is that everything
shades off into something else with whose nature its
own mingles, as the present mingles inextricably with
the past and future and the then creeps up and over-
takes the now. "There is a penumbra which defeats
the exactitude of every assumed connection," and it
is only in the ignoring of this penumbra that the
gratuitous paradoxes of philosophy arise. Mr. Blood
expands this proposition by means of an analysis of
the moot-point of current philosophy — the nature
and reality of motion and time. His treatment of
the famous Zenonian paradox of Achilles and the
Tortoise is typical. "Let," he says, "Achilles him-
self propose the paradox that he cannot overtake the
tortoise, and we see at once that to be a philosopher
he has to be a knave ; the mathematical requirement
of the feat is wholly impertinent to its empirical
accomplishment."

"The theoretical puzzle of Achilles is that in the
punctual unity of each repeated effort he must
achieve the distance between himself and the reptile
at the outset — during which accomplishment the
latter wiU of course have advanced somewhat : and
this recurring somewhat, however short its space,
renews the whole problem — for AchiUes' next effort
is assumed to be spent in the covering of that space,
while the tortoise gains a new one, offering the same
difficulty in the mathematical impossibility of ex-
hausting a whole by taking away successive frac-


INTRODUCTION xxxix

tions of it, since the remainder will ever be a whole.
The absurdity of the story appears in the assump-
tion that the athlete is intellectually hobbled, in his
repeated efforts, punctually one by one, so that he
may not continue to do his best as in the first en-
deavor, but must waste a whole unit on the little
space which his rival has added to the course; and
it is this restraint, which in practice he would never
dream of (and which might be in another country),
that encumbers an empirical proposition with a con-
ceptual impossibility, uncalled for and impertinent."
With the exposition of "ancillary unity" Mr,
Blood's dialectic concludes: We are now on the
verge of the anaesthetic revelation. Yet to make
the transition not too abrupt, he turns for authority
and justification to the central figure of the Chris-
tian tradition. He claims the sacredness of Jesus for
the side of his secularity. As each one of us carries an
ancillary penumbra which sucks up and deindivid-
ualizes our entity, a penumbra shading into the
aliency of the endless pluriverse, and funneling its
concentration through us, as light through a lens, so
Jesus also carried the cosmic penumbra. He also re-
pudiated man's responsibility, self-sufficiency, self-
relation. Thus in the narrative regarding the woman
taken in adultery — "the pertinence and motive of
the legend can obtain only in the divine purpose of
the gospel to relieve the human conscience of any
responsibility to the inspiring power whose behest
it powerlessly fulfils." Thus, again, in Jesus' re-
mark concerning himself that of himself he could do
nothing. No sum, no category of human concep-
tion is adequate to the solution of the riddle of ex-


xl INTRODUCTION

istence, to the abolition of "duplexity" : "freedom,
originality and reason, as in equation with the Mys-
tery, shall be the last hopes of mortal explanation,"
And so "the Mystery" is upon us. It is heralded
with the significant remark : "our hope is not so much
to philosophize the mystery as to signalize in it an
unequivocal impasse whose obstruction can be neither
obviated nor defined. ..." It is the rock-bottom of
reality whose uniqueness is irreducible and whose
very recollection yields only a sense of initiation, of
"now you know." The realization that comes to an
animal passing over blood freshly spiUed on the
ground is of its sort ; the animal is "arrested and en-
tranced, seemingly by some exhalation from the vital
fluid." Of its sort may be the spell that holds a
calf to its place in the absence of its mother, or that
constrains a brooding hen, or that, at the point of
death, is indicated in the "stare of seeming recog-
nition, as of some wonderful import, just before
but distinctly not inclusive with the 'setting' of the
eyes." What is found in the revelation is "no static
unaccountable equation, but rather a constant ex-
cess, a going on simply because it is going on, in
which the natural endeavor to account for itself
proves to be of a piece with and containing the same
stuff that it is meant to account for. . . . There
never was a time that did not recognize the pre-
sumption of time and the push of its own necessity,
and also that any question of its motive was itself
a sufficient reason at once for its continuance and its
precedence, but with no relation to a beginning."
What validates this philosophic commonplace as
Mystery and as Revelation is "the immemorial ata-


INTRODUCTION xli

vism, the sense of initiation, the voice of the blood,
the unique assurance that it is a revelation of the
historical and the inevitable and the time out of
mind." It may befall each man differently, accord-
ing to his nature, and no one man's befalling is ever
reducible to another's. If it be unique for each, it
is so because it shows him the commonplace secular
stretch of time where his own being is but the instant
firing-point of an advancing line. All this through
anassthesia, the right psychology of whose remission
is stated, in Mr. Blood's judgment, by Xenos Clark:
"It is the one sole and sufficient insight why (or
not why, but how) the present is pushed on by the
past, and sucked forward by the vacuity of the fu-
ture. Its inevitableness defeats all attempts at stop-
ping or accounting for it. It is all precedence and
presupposition, and questioning is in regard to it
forever too late. It is an initiation of the past.
The real secret would be the formula by which the
now' keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet never es-
capes. What is it, indeed, that keeps existence ex-
foliating? The formal being of anything, the logi-
cal definition of it, is static. For mere logic every
question contains its own answer — we simply fill
the hole with the dirt we dug out. Why are twice
two four? Because, in fact, four is twice two. Thus
logic finds in life no propulsion, only a momentum.
It goes because it is a-going. But the revelation
adds: it goes because it is and was a-going. You
walk, as it were, round yourself in the revelation.
Ordinary philosophy is like a hound hunting his
own trail. The more he hunts the farther he has to
go, and his nose never catches up with his heels, be-


i.


xlii INTRODUCTION

cause it is forever ahead of them. So the present
is already a foregone conclusion, and I am ever too
late to understand it. But at the moment of recov-
ery from anaesthesis, just then, before starting on
life, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse of my heels, a
glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of
starting. The truth is that we travel on a journey
that was accomplished before we set out; and the
real end of philosophy is accomplished, not when we
arrive at, but when we remain in, our destination
(being already there) — which may occur vicari-
ously in this life when we cease our intellectual ques-
tioning. That is why there is a smile upon the face
of the revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we
are forever half a second too late — that's all. 'You
could kiss your own lips, and have all the fun to your-
self,' it says, 'if you only knew the trick. It would
be perfectly easy if they would just stay there till
you got round to them.'

"The Anjesthetic Revelation is the Initiation of
Man into the Immemorial Mystery of the Open Se-
cret of Being, revealed as the Inevitable Vortex of
Continuity. Inevitable is the word. Its motive is
inherent — it is what has to be. It is not for any
love or hate, nor for joy nor sorrow, nor good nor
m. End, beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.

"It affords no particular of the multiplicity and
variety of things; but it fills appreciation of the
historical and the sacred with a secular and inti-
mately personal illumination of the nature and mo-
tive of existence, which then seems reminiscent — as
if it should have appeared, or shall yet appear, to
every participant thereof.


INTRODUCTION xHii

"Although it is at first startling in its solenmity,
it becomes directly such a matter of course — so old-
fashioned, and so akin to proverbs, that it inspires
exultation rather than fear, and a sense of safety,
as identified with the aboriginal and the universal.
But no words may express the imposing certainty
of the patient that he is realizing the primordial,
Adamic surprise of Life.

"Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same,
and as if it could not possibly be otherwise. The
subject resumes his normal consciousness only to
partially and fitfully remember its occurrence, and
to try to formulate its baffling import, with only this
consolatory afterthought: that he has known the
oldest truth, and that he has done with human the-
ories as to the origin, meaning, or destiny of the race.
He is beyond instruction in 'spiritual things.' "

And so end philosophy and its perplexities and its
contradictory solutions that do not solve. The Rev-
elation itself is, according to Mr. Blood, not a solu-
tion either. It is a satisfaction. It is a satisfaction
because it shows that what seems to be really is, that
the question is the answering, that the answer is the
questioning itself.

To many, what is attained here must seem no more
than the blind autonomy and naive acquiescence in
which consists the consciousness of the beasts of the
field. This needs no denial. It is the manner of the
attainment that counts, that must be added to the
goal, and that being added alters its nature and sig-
nificance. The beasts of the field are not mystics
and men who become mystics do so only by the force
of the philosophy with which they justify their be-


xliv INTRODUCTION

coming. It is in this addition, in this power of dia-
lectic circling that our manhood resides. The vindi-
cation through philosophic questioning of undoubting
consciousness of the beast is the victorious self-pres-
ervation of the doubting consciousness of man.

H. M. Kaxlen.


PLURIVERSE

CHAPTER I
DUPLEXITY

SECTION FIRST

The Critical and the Dogmatic

PHILOSOPHY, as the science of explanation,
naturally assumes the coincidence of the pos-
sible and the rational, and as well of the
rational and the logical. But experience rudely
jostles this amicable adjustment. The human finite,
as a local and ephemeral parasite, finds his prime
concernment in causes and beginnings and ends, while
the stable cosmos can afford only vibrations and
compensations. To Sufficient Intelligence all things
always are ; only in a nightmare could it dream of a
radical beginning or an utterly ceasing. And as
for logic and expression, these can claim only as
imitation or re-presentation, which at best may at-
tain similitude, while "truth" is what likeness ex-
plicitly lacks, and what identity only could supply.

Reality itself, in and as knowledge, would have no
essential being. Knowing is not being — not "thing
in itself" — unless, always, knowledge is self-known.
It is a fair conjecture that finite rationality is not
consistent with cosmic conditions, and may factually
be called upon to tolerate the rationally impossible.

1


2 PLURIVERSE

Philosophy proposes a weird partnership or equa-
tion between man and the world, as subject and ob-
ject, and these two prove strangely convertible and
interwoven. That the transient subject, for all his
legends of rainbow "covenants" and conversations
face to face, "as of a man with his friend," should
fail as a divine correspondent, is not surprising.

Yet duplexity is the main parenthesis of philos-
ophy, signalizing a more or less explicit duality, a
kind of sex, suggestive of attrition and process and
result, with their thousand proverbs of reaction and
compensation, even of strife as the father of things.
Duality is especially the fated nature of conscious-
ness, but whether instantly such in itself, or by a
process of shifting viewpoints, making the wonder of
a self to itself, is one of the most annoying and per-
sistent problems of philosophy. A rational unity
would require an intelligence that is such as an
object or topic to itself; it should comprehend and
include itself, even in the contradiction that the other
is the same. But then, what is the use of contradic-
tion?

We must call upon Emerson here :

"It is all idle, talking. Life is made up of the in-
termixture and reaction of two amicable powers
whose marriage appears beforehand monstrous, as
each denies and tends to abolish the other. We must
reconcile the contradictions as we can, but their dis-
cord and concord introduce wild absurdities into our
thinking and speech. No sentence will hold the whole
truth, and the only way we can be just is by giving
ourselves the lie: Speech is better than silence —
silence is better than speech — things are and are


DUPLEXITY 3

not at the same time — and the like. AH the uni-
verse over there is but one thing, this old Two-Face,
creator-creature, right-wrong, of which any propo-
sition may be affirmed or denied."

To a man on the street (if one could be supposed
to stop and listen to it) this diatribe, seeming to dis-
countenance all literary expression, even as confes-
sion, were but rigmarole or absurdity, possible un-
der poetic license ; but so far from all this, it has to
be recognized as the basis of all responsible criti-
cism.

From this classic substratum rose the reluctant
confession of Kant: "It is sad and doubtless pro-
voking, that reason, the only tribune for all con-
flicts, should be in conflict with herself."

We read in Schwegler also: "Only in the last of
days can history account itself a work of reason."

Herr Eucken exclaims : "Scarcely anything re-
pels so much as the impertinence of representing the
world as it is as a realm of reason." And for this
he is awarded the Nobel prize.

It makes good reading too in the Hibhert Journal
(July 1910) : "There is no complete generalization,
no total point of view, no all-pervasive unity. . . .
There is no conclusion — what has concluded, that
we might conclude in regard to it. J" . . . The mys-
tery remains as somewhat to be dealt with by facul-
ties more akin to our activities and heroisms than to
our logical powers."

In his exhaustive study of "Parmenides" Plato
seems to have driven human rationality entirely from
the field of explanation: "Whether one is or is not,
one and the others in relation to themselves and one


4 PLURIVERSE

another, all of them, in every way, are and are not,
and appear and appear not."

Popular civilization gets a call-down here. How
has it responded to this esoteric arraignment of its
power of expression and conception, in presence of
the old Two-Face "of which any proposition may be
affirmed or denied?" And either way under the han-
dicap that no one sentence will hold the whole truth !
Think of the numberless writers and teachers and
preachers, with very liberal salaries and considerable
reputations, taking themselves quite seriously: how
has been condoned or compromised the inconsistency
of their pretensions with possibility and rationality
radically dissociated? Under what apologies or
exceptions do the universities assume to have ac-
complished their thousands of graduates?

We should have expected in such an imbroglio that
some determined spirit would long ago have come to
the front with either a clarion denunciation of phil-
osophy as the headline of the intellectual program,
or with some tour de force in "method" wherein an
expert might succeed in expression, even under the
handicap that his opponent on his own ground might
be as knowing as himself, with an equal standing in
court. Why not a "commission" on the subject?

So far from any such ingenious Sclaircissement
appearing in the record, the position is stalled and
camouflaged in a myopic pretence that there is
nothing to be concealed — or if there is any inex-
plicable complication in the premises, it shall re-
dound the more to the glory of God, with whom all
things are possible. "Metaphysics" gets but a sinis-
ter shrug. "Religion out of church is sacrilege":


DUPLEXITY 5

it is bad form, such as would be discussion of the
sacred privacies of the family physician. But in
the church, safe from the free lances of the club and
the clinic, rank exhorters who know little of the
idealism that alone might tolerate their pretensions,
speak as familiarly of God as Master Shallow spoke
of John of Gaunt : "he might have been born brother
to him."

It is fairly up to criticism and book-reviewing and
reputation-making to adjudicate this challenge of
reason by reason. Is the problem of true thought
and expression — the classic "truth" — so obdurate
as the professional thinkers have left it? Literature
as well as metaphysics shall find its prestige at stake
upon the question, whether this of Eucken is really
the last word of truth — "the difficulty, indeed, the
impossibility of its appropriate representation in
thought and conception!"

Experts find it easy enough, however idle or incon-
sequent, flirting between equivalent viewpoints —
ideal and real, static and dynamic, and dogmatically
setting up half-truths which, when depended upon,
directly topple over in their own partiality. Society
has helplessly consented that certain oppositions
shall be ignored. We cloak over our inconvenient
discoveries and suspicions. The astronomer speaks
of the "sunrise" quite childlike and bland ; and the
profoundest idealist constantly confesses to the in-
tegrity of matter. A rap on the head gives a con-
viction of reality that no idea can come forth of it
and refute. Criticism of the common sense comes
back in its own face ; like the wasp and the hornet, it
leaves its sting in the wound, and is fatal to itself.


6 PLURIVERSE

For there does seem to be in the world, and more
or less as the world, an essential opposition, which
throws truth into contradiction. And the opposi-
tion is elemental, integral, punitive, entitling vitally
opposing viewpoints, and encouraging antagonistic
creeds. Down upon the practical field it entails the
survival of the fittest. In metaphysics we see being
and not-being insisting upon and pervading each
other. We read of "negation positive in its result."

Such is really the genius of being, such the burden
of philosophy. If possibility will stand for essential
opposition it must stand for logical contradiction;
there must be contrary knowledges at the same in-
tegral point. But opposing knowledges (not mere
opinions) at the same point are null except upon one
condition: the reality shall not he objectively de-
termined, not a thing in itself, but rather what it is
known as, the subjects themselves furnishing any ap-
parent difference. But these knowledges may be
good and sufScient for their subjects — half-truths
perhaps, but wholes to half-natures. A man may
stake life and soul that the sun goes around ■ the
earth; "to whom a thing appears that thing is,"
said the ancient ; but for this to be true and not an
illusion of sense reality must be subjectively deter-
mined, and not an alien thing in itself.

Reality by right should be essentially, or in and
of itself; but for philosophy, which is a kind of im-
pertinence, it can be only what it is known as. In
truth being and essence should be identical, but in
philosophy they are merely the same, and dialectically
the same is another (there needs two for sameness).
Though it were a re-presentation it were not truly


DUPLEXITY 7

the same though similar, or at best a likeness, and
"truth" is explicitly what likeness lacks : pure being,
rightly same in its identity, without limit or distinc-
tion, for philosophy becomes "one" — a being of
limit and comprehension ; and when philosophy would
comprehend its all as one it has to negotiate the
anomaly of somewhat limiting and comprehending
itself. Por, as said Philolaus, "one is made by lim-
iting," and if all is one or a whole it is such by the
limiting and comprehension of itself. The whole has
no environment or room containing it : these if neces-
sary shall be in the whole's own essence; and hence
its comprehension is from within, spiritual, as of
an ego or personal intelligence.

In taking the world as a problem philosophy neces-
sarily raises the question, whether reality is objec-
tively essential — a thing in itself — or merely what
it is known as ; and this again becomes under criti-
cism a double question. Knowledge itself will in
turn be called upon as to whether it is authentically
such, or only what it can be critically proved — pos-
sibly only secondary and given.

For idealism reality has no objective integrity; or
if at best it has position the same is questionable and
indifferent. For pure philosophy the world must he
what it is known as ; and if knowledge itself is in
question it must be self-determined.

That reality is identical for only what it is known
as, consider the matter of its different sizes.

All sane human beings are agreed as to the ap-
parent sizes of different things as something genuine
and reliable; the world (we assume) is real as in and
of these sizes. But when we subject an object to


8 PLUMVERSE

the microscope and enlarge its size many times, and
find potentially in it beautiful features, and per-
chance living creatures for which the unaided eye
is inadequate, we learn that in true sesthetic value our
sizes are but arbitrary and accidental determinations
of our own lenses, and that the world may have as
many sizes as it has observers, and that it is identical
only as position in some occult order of being, with
no size at aU of its own, in fact that all things in
themselves (if there are such) are the same.

For instance we may say categorically that light
and darkness are the same. Every one knows the
sense in which they are different, but he may need to
be advised of a vital sense in which they are alike,
to wit, that neither is essential, or anything at
all in itself — and further that there may be no
reality in itself, but specifically only what it is
known as.

As for light and darkness, we know that if all the
light should go out there would be left no distinc-
tion — no form nor line nor shade of difference.
But consider : if all the darkness shotdd go out, the
pure light would be equally void of any line or form
or difference. It should appear then that neither
li^t nor darkness essentially affords distinction, nor
one more than the other, but that distinction in it-
self is a property of intelligence. The difference of
two things is not a property of either.

In practical life we easily condone our opposing
viewpoints. We assume a duplex consciousness of
the sun going around the earth and the earth going
around the sun; we allow them to mingle their mo-
tions,


DUPLEXITY 9

Forever singing as they shme:

" The hand that made us is divine,"

But we are not quite so ready in accepting as half-
truths universe and pluriverse, or theism and
atheism, as they arise in the consideration of space
as either going on-and-on beyond comprehension,
unity or personality, or as being in itself nothing,
save by the voluntary occupying of subjective spirit.
Concurring freely with Herr Eucken as to the imper-
tinent presumption of the finite in assuming that the
cosmos, to be at all, must be rational, or consistent
with its parasitical nature, and agreeing generally
that the rational and the possible are not necessarily
coincident, we regard it as no heroic undertaking,
holding theism and atheism as half-truths equally
defensible.

Said Novalis : "Philosophy can bake no bread, but
she can give us God, freedom and immortality."

By baking no bread he doubtless alluded to our
utter ignorance of any natural law, the fact being
that we know nothing of natural causes or elements ;
but for idealism (which was his only intention as
philosophy) the world is not an alien imposition upon
consciousnessjbut rather is determined by (or through)
consciousness; and the seeming extensity of space
is a mirage of spiritual liberty — the room and pos-
sibility of the spirit's action, and nothing at all in
itself, nothing "out there."

The advantage of this absorption of space is to
the spirit's unity and comprehension. Philosophy
as explanation requiring a being that is sufficient
in itself, and unity or one being due to limitation and


10 PLURIVERSE

comprehension, the vagary of a mere space-compre-
hension, a one in an unlimited other, would not be the
one of all that supremacy and safety require. The
one must furnish or contain its own limit, and phil-
osophy as idealism proposes this in the self-knowing,
self-limiting and every way self -determining (they
would say self-creating if they dared) of the one.

(For scientific purposes it is better to understand
here by the popular words, God, freedom and im-
mortality, the plainer meanings of unity, sponta-
neity and safety.)

All turns here upon the notion of space — whether
it is concrete objective extensity, or else the spirit's
reflection of its own capacity and freedom of achieve-
ment, in a world where things are not alien and inte-
gral in themselves, but are what they are known as,
determined by or through the lenses and forms of
personal organization.

If space is physical extensity — out there, a con-
crete terrain whether it be occupied or empty,
going on and on with nothing to stop it — then
there is no more to be said of unity or comprehen-
sion, no more of "all" or "the whole." Pluriverse
is the word, the everywhere as here, the democracy
of the many, the impossibility of autocracy or
supremacy or general personality.

(There needs care here to avoid the whim of "the
infinite." We vacantly see space going on, and let
it go at that: "infinite," because we neglect the
finishing and carrying out of the thought of it.
But it makes a radical difference in theology whether
our outlook is mere indifference and negligence or
a concrete continuum beyond comprehension. If


DUPLEXITY 11

the spirit determines its own space and unity and
comprehension [as self-consciousness is supposed to
demonstrate] then there is a possibility of God, free-
dom and immortality, self-centred and safe from
any dangerous environment.)

Obviously there are here two ostensible viewpoints
from which to rationalize a no less formidable opposi-
tion than that of theism and atheism. To the
average culture pluriverse is inevitable; space goes
on and on, and there is no comprehension nor limit
nor unity, and no whole save the soHpsist's whim of
another than himself. But against this rises the
world of idealism, which from its viewpoint cannot
be disqualified.

The seemingly necessary and logical going on of
space can be countered by an equally fated necessity
of intelligence itself, whereby thought has a centri-
petal and self-relating tendency, a transcending ex-
cess of its own essence as knowledge in and of itself
(possible if not rational) whereby it may constantly
revert from the true tangent of extensity to the
down-curving water-level of the planet-born, and
prove the space which is conceived of as outward ex-
tension to be the freedom of its own will to extend,
and that its limit and its wholeness are its own prop-
erty — not framed or stayed by otherness, but essen-
tial as self-related.

Of course we of the scientific world know how this
trick of orbicular intelligence is played upon us in
the water-level, and we know that while in our
logic nothing can be related to itself, yet we do
constantly entertain the conceit of knowing our-
selves without definite objectification, and of having


12 PLURIVERSE

an independent autonomous spontaneity of power —
such as someone or something somewhere or somehow
should afford for explanation. And as for our so
confident assurance that space goes on and on
whether occupied or not, let us see by an easy psy-
chological experiment how Novalis would prove that
philosophy can "give us God, freedom and immortal-
ity."

He has but to show that space-extensity is men-
tal, and then all the objective world will respond to
the subjective spirit, and dwell in the sphericity of
a freedom in which it may advance equally and in-
finitely in any direction — a universe founded from
within, not prescribed or framed by otherness, but
having in itself essentially the otherness wherein
reason or fancy would produce or sustain existence.

Let the experimenter then resolutely set forth to
walk off the planet into space and prove its endless
outward extensity an objective reality.

We should foresee that in achieving this field or
route our protagonist as an ingenious spirit will, as
we might say, have one eye upon himself ; and while,
on his passage, he will at first measure this achieve-
ment by the bounds and barriers which he passes,
he will also credit himself with the exertion that he
puts forth ; and in this regard' he might well perceive
that a blind man on a treadmill would be covering
space at the same rate, and to the same extent. In
the outer field of the empyrean our experimenter's
eyes will be useless as to his advance; there will be
no guideboards to pass, and he will be ready to con-
fess that space so demonstrated or accomplished is
literally nothing, and that the only considerable


DUPLEXITY 13

thing or fact to be objectified in the premises is his
own liberty of action, which he has been erroneously
construing as an atmosphere in which he lived.

As an intellectual problem, this proving space by
units of outer exertion is the same as would be the
proving of possibility by inward steps of the infinite
divisibility of number. Our traveller (for the higher
thought) is only marking time, and proving that
space is his own freedom, while for the lower or prag-
matic thought he is pursuing the water-level of the
planet-born, and like the compass-foot that is ever
returning while advancing, he will but identify his
position by process, and prove that "unit and uni-
verse are round."

Nevertheless, over against this demonstration of
orbicular intelligence, the pluriversal continuum
stands immovably transcendent of all unity, compre-
hension or personality, and in the name of science
protests that only the boor and the bigot bow to the
rising sun.

Science can have no quarrel with Novalis for re-
calling space into himself, for we shall find under
"Idealism" that all our world is a deposition of con-
sciousness ; but what we claim for duplexity is that
the reverse of his doctrine is an equally plausible
argument from grounds whose reality is as invincibly
real as his own. We are not taking a side, but
rather claiming that philosophy has been an in-
consequent excursion. Our exclamation, Pluriverse,
is here preferred to Universe only as emphasizing
the clumsiness of those who Hve constantly in the
dream of Novalis with no scintil of the idealism
without which it is crudely irrational.


14- PLURIVERSE

It is peremptorily obvious to the modern man,
whom the astronomers have driven to the Coperni-
can viewpoint, that facts as sure as the rising of the
sun have to pass as illusions in order to give sanity
and "sense" to doctrines that have grown out of
unquestionable accuracy of thinking, which none the
less stands loyally by the old ideas from the old
viewpoints, which can be neither ignored nor super-
seded. The best form will not necessarily take a
side in the theistic controversy. When the insist-
ent dogmatist puts his question, "Is not one or the
other of these propositions absolutely and exclusively
true.'"' the best culture can but smiling put the
question by, or like Socrates refer it to the profes-
sional experts.

Surely whatever is to be admitted in our world
of thought should be expressible in words ; we do no
consecutive thinking otherwise than in conventional
terms; but we are to consider that language is an
invention slowly produced, and our philosophy in-
fers the morning of the times. So far it is an in-
consequent excursion in the hope of comprehension.

It is confessedly a strenuous and thankless role
of thinking assuming the equivalence of opposing
hypotheses in the same premises, and allowing a
fighting chance to half-truths while denying any
unity of generalization. Consistently we could
never speak at all in the presence of the old "Two-
Face," under whose countenance "any proposition
may be affirmed or denied" ; but convention has po-
litely shelved these ultimate questions in the pre-
sumptive interest of religion, and before advancing


DUPLEXITY 16

to scientific idealism we shall speak more popularly
of duplexity, less as of the critical and the dog-
matic, and more as of the static and the dynamic.

SECTION SECOND

Static and Dynamic Relations
Only confusion can result from the exploitation
of any philosophical topic without a previous appre-
ciation of the ineluctable duplexity which involves
all thought and things, and which primarily and
most portentously divides the field of speculation
into time and eternity; demanding two opposing
viewpoints, to be severally characterized as the
static and the dynamic, equally defensible/

From the static viewpoint all things always are.
For sufficient reason nothing could newly become;
for becoming is in a time process, and in it the identi-
cal might only partly be, except under the startling
concession of a reality both being and not being in
the same instant, congenitaUy splitting the tongue
of truth.

We may notice here, and perhaps as fitly as if
anywhere else, that in the matter of a complete be-
ing between the past and the future (neither of
which presently is), or of complete being as embrac-
ing being and not-being in contradiction, the under-
standing of Hegelism is that the truth of the abso-
lute fact is process, or transcendental nature, in
which being and not-being (logically apprehended)
are moments, or mental elements. These, in the
Hegelian exposition of the topic, appear and dis-
appear in a tergiversation between the static and
1 See Chapter IX,


16 PLURIVERSE

dynamic viewpoints, either of which may be dog-
matically defended — although they can be recon-
ciled only in a confessed contradiction — by unify-
ing identity and difference, and by claiming
as (logically) instant a self-relation confessedly
achieved by a lapsing process of the "in-itself" to
the "for-itself." His dexterity in this tergiversa-
tion is "the secret of Hegel."

We may as weU here notice especially the duplex
nature of man.

Note firstly in his make-up the primeval equa-
tion of substance and form, or extension and thought,
as he stands visible and invisible, apprehensible only
by the joint faculties of sensation and reflection, of
sense and spirit. Next see him double and opposed
as male and female ; and curious science has gone so
far as to detect in either of these orders a rudiment-
ary incipience of the other — as if, were one sex
destroyed, the other might project the lost one from
itself. Note further the duplexity of his two sides,
right and left. From head to foot he seems put
together as two variously independent parts, each
with its leg and arm, and eye and ear, and its side
of the organs of taste and smeU — each with its half
of the brain, the lungs, kidneys and heart ; each with
its system of nerves and vessels ; and one of these sides
may be at least partially paralyzed while the other
is working comparatively well.

More intimately observe how each of the sides in
turn is double in the method of its construction, in
that it is throughout tubular — hollow and filled,
container and content ; the binding web, of which we
might say, it is the man proper, is filled with blood


DUPLEXITY 17

and juices and food increment, foi-mally accessory;
the food and the juices inhabit their proper chan-
nels, and with regard to the integral man may be
said to enter the form but not the substance: like
a knife stabbed into a billet of wood, it may dyna-
mically knock but it does not chemically enter.

The same persistent duplexity characterises the
tubular web ; for this in turn is made up of tubes.
As in the ancient homoiomeria hair was made of
lesser hairs, and feathers of lesser feathers, and stones
of lesser stones, and the world at large of lesser
worlds, so every tube seems made of lesser tubes that
are made of tubes themselves, until, beyond the limits
of microscopic observation, the sensible identity
fades in the infinite divisibility of matter, lost in
the bottomless well where, according to Deraocritus,
Truth disappears from mortal view.

From the dynamic viewpoint, whence we naively
recognize Nature and becoming, and seem to visual-
ize change and increase and diminution, the static
schema excludes any such idea of intelligence as we
can admit or understand ; and it vacates the reality
of all human experience. It denies the possibility of
novelty in nature and consciousness, and imposes an
AU-knower, with a "general" personality, yet com-
petent to identify individual idiosyncrasies of
thought and feeling within a compass as small as
their own. If a man were down, in life's battle, and
had "taken the count" up to nine, this All-knower
should himself be within one tick of the knock-out.
How else could he realize the finite measure of such
a consciousness?


18 PLURIVERSE

Wavering between these adverse viewpoints, phil-
osophy develops various "activity situations," in
which being and change are so confused that a logi-
cal statement of the case involves an identity of dif-
ference. Our conscious experience of life and time
is of a continuum of process and change, growth and
decay, becoming and deceasing, in which philosophy
raises a question as to what really is. She must in-
sist that only what fully is is real, and she challenges
a condition of becoming for somewhat that has fully
become. We are loth to admit that any reality can
only partly be — as if it were half in and half out of
the real world, or as if the world were but half real,
or as if what we mean by identity is difference and
process. AU these questions arise from any careful
consideration of what we thoughtlessly call the pres-
ent tense.

A contract for a working model, or even a "side
elevation" of the present tense, done under all its
scientific exactitudes, would drive the best inspired
architect to either a madhouse or the ultimate surd.
He would have to first effect a compromise with the
static viewpoint, which can only under protest coun-
tenance any present tense at all. For to Sufiicient
Intelligence (and no other can obtain) all things
always are, aaid the form of eternity excludes any
form of time. An "eternal present" is a whim which
the sure method quickly evaporates. But adopting
the dynamic viewpoint, as the only feasible one for
us, his first outlook would encounter two cross-uni-
versals. The spacial universe cuts like a disk at
right angles across the universe of duration, and the
crux of reality is at the instant junction of the two.


DUPLEXITY 19

Around this point swarm like bees and hornets the
positive and negative queries of speculation. Here
the time current offers to criticism its three moments
of present, past and future, to be construed under the
requirements of community, contrast, opposition and
compensation; and at the same intersection the
spacial universe presents to the wavering time ele-
ment the sympathy of a problematic unity of matter
and form, of real and ideal.

We shall not dwell upon this crucial collocation
just here, but will offer a suggestion as to "the na-
ture of things," always intending by the word nature,
the gerund or noun-participle, as the act, fact and
substance of being born.

An object of sensation is presumptively such in
the present tense only; but as subject to the passage
of time it is also presumptively in continual change,
and therefore never wholly identical, never quite the
same ; but since it may not at once be wholly other in
its change, the object as such is a quasi identity of
changing aspects, and the endurance of similarity
in any one of its aspects constitutes it as a "thing."
A cross-section, or a breaking-off of the stream of
time at any given instant, would show an aspect on
its hither end.

As a merely provisional simile I will instance the
body of time as. a confectioner's batch of candy,
made to be drawn out into the usual "sticks." In
making up the batch (ordinarily of 25 pounds), the
expert makes a fasces or rope of rolls of differently
colored stock, so ingeniously disposed that when
drawn out, and broken at any point, the ends of any
stick will present a picture, possibly of a star, or a


20 PLURIVERSE

rose, or a bird. If these various strands of the fasces
may represent the elements or laws in the body of
the stream of time, we may envisage a thing in the
present tense as an aspect or a picture done on the
hither ends of the laws.

Certain thoughts in passing are inevitable in view
of the present tense, or of its genius as we apprehend
it. Our first necessity is, in attempting to assume
a definite present as distinct from the future and the
'past, we materialize or embody it, and subject it to
the infinite divisibility — the real centre of the ideal
centre, etc. (i. e. reconciling matter and form) . But
when we pause in satisfaction at the present tense
in its three stadia of present, past, and future, the
same acumen which proposes these divisions finds
itself called upon to grade the three into one an-
other : there are as many degrees between the present
and the future as there are between the future and
the past. Infinity, the bottomless well, intercepts
every possible distinction.

It was our thought to apply these necessities to
practical music. The maestro may pride himself on
his distinction of tones and semitones, and so deter-
mine the matter of music, but the genius of music
holds its carousal between his lines, in infinite di-
vision. Here it is that we learn how the violin is
queen of all instruments. The piano, the organ, the
harp, are fixed at given intervals; only the violin
finds the infinite difference, where even the pulse of
the artist varies the pressure on the string, and de-
notes the soul.

The recognition of these opposing viewpoints is


DUPLEXITY 21

the most venerable characteristic of the sagacity of
our earliest historical past. Long before the Greeks
had contemplated the problematical aspects of the
One and the Many, or of being and not-being, the
Semitic genius had detected the subtlety and the
fatality of truth's double tongue. Even to the
Talmudic sages the legend of Job was antique, yet
therein the duplexity of the ultimate was as dis-
tinctly pronounced as it was by Parmenides or Zeno.

In the "Vulgate translation of this ancient scrip-
ture we read that Zophar the Naamathite, said unto
Job: "And that He would show thee the secrets of
wisdom, that thev are double to that which is."
(Job xi, 6.)

The last clause here rather exaggerates the du-
plexity intended. In the correct translation of the
original Hebrew (as I am instructed) it is wisdom,
not the secrets, that is double; and further, the
clause here is incomplete, and this as to its most rele-
vant and ingenious import. I may be permitted to
offer a more accurate translation :

"And that He would reveal unto thee the secrets of
•wisdom — for it is double to that which is really in
our comprehension."

The last word is convertible as either physical pos-
session or mental comprehension. The sages of the
Talmud have used "toosi io" as synonymous with
wisdom itself :

"Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being un-
perfect; and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when
as yet there was none of them." (Psalms, cxxxix, 16.)


22 PLURIVERSE

Another translation :

"My undeveloped substance did thy eyes see, and
in thy book were all of them written down — the
days which have been formed while yet none of them
was here."

Again the Preacher said:

"That which hath been is now ; and that which is
to be hath been already: and God requireth that
which is past."

These ancient sentences overhang our lucubra-
tions, warning us how old is philosophy — how early
man tried to turn upon himself — to put being into
thought, and thought into language, to objectify
an ultimate generalization, a one of it all — only to
find, at second-thought, that at best he was other
to his one, and that his ultimate unity was duplexity
at last — that the truth of his knowledge was a
vanishing phantom of endeavor to know — to effect
a self-relation, to realize being in thought, matter
in form, the divine spirit in the Word, and the Word
in the flesh. AU this comes down to us in the con-
fessed failure and discontent of philosophers: for
modern instance, in the dream of Fichte, of "being
out of its being," as mto "existence," or the claim
of Schelling that "something deeper than science
he certainly did know," or the despair of Jacobi that
there was a light in his heart which failed when he
would bring it into his understanding, even as Saint
Paul's law in his members antagonized the law in
his mind.

These troubles will in course recur to us as we
advance toward the revelation of the Mystery,
wherein the unique must fail to be articulate and


DUPLEXITY 23

factual, because there can be nothing comparable as
either like to it or different from it — it being feas-
ible in personal experience alone.

Right here, for a modus vivendi, we must apologize
and if possible conciliate. We began by disqualify-
ing philosophy at its ostensible best — not promising
on our own part to philosophize any better, but
rather intimating another kind of satisfaction —
and still we are in a way philosophising. We ac-
knowledge the discrepancy; we have to dogmatize
even in declaring our ignorance, using an intelligence
whose finality we question: a kind of knowing that
we do not know.

A claim of Sufficient Intelligence would assume the
radical solution of the philosophical problem, while
all the intelligence that we know of is secondary
and unaccountably given to us — so that our course
is ever wavering between an ideal of certainty and a
practical plausibility. We shall hold that there is
no "sufficient reason" short of a self-relation which
we cannot admit; and while we deplore our uncer-
tainty we. cannot greatly admire a consistency due
to an arbitrary and meretricious partiality for
either horn of an incorrigible dilemma. We have
simply found the problem of its practical unity in-
soluble in the philosophic methods of the past ; and
our treatise is not necessarily impeached by the
adoption, more or less satisfactorily, of a different
standard of satisfaction and a different method of
attaining it. We admit equally the horns of the
dilemma, and by the adoption of a name for it hold
it in a merely nominal though philosophically useful
existence.


24 PLURrVERSE

When we say that to a Siifficient Intelligence all
things always are (since for it all causes or ra-
tional principles shall have emptied their effects, and
forestalled from it all novelty and surprise), we are
entertaining an ideal of intelligence higher than our
own practice exemplifies ; and only by a degradation
of this reason (as knowing all causes or fertilities
exhausted) can we admit the reality of our ever-be-
coming world, which nevertheless our pains and
pleasures so positively and even punitively authenti-
cate.

Nevertheless such an all-knowing intelligence
is a transcendental presumption. Critically con-
sidered, no intelligence as merely such is sufficient
for fundamental explanation. Intelligence, as we
exemplify or acknowledge it, is after the fact known
— except upon a condition which we shall find in-
admissible: to wit, that there is no lapse or passage
of time between the intention of the subject and the
existence of the fact known. Any such lapse, for
the thinkers whom we shall prefer and defend (as
opposed to "self-consciousness," so called), is a
merely nominal "identity of difference," a clever
logical puzzle which would meretriciously annul all
distinction, since, forsooth, difference must be (to
be at all) identically such, while identity itself has
"all the difference in the world" from difference —
making strife the ill-begotten father of things: a
fact, if fact it is, of little credit to philosophy as
satisfactory explanation.

The dialectic position best appealing to us would
assume a chasm between the static and dynamic
viewpoints, the breadth and potentiality of which


DUPLEXITY 25

vary with the cultural and temperamental differences
of philosophers themselves, some of whom have fan-
cied "truth" as in absolute contradiction — reso-
lutely holding being and not-being as the same —
while others have shaded or mellowed direct opposi-
tion by a bias diversion of it into process (through
time's becoming), or else making conceptual ab-
stractions serve for perceptual or empirical uses —
which Kant forbade.

It may amuse, however little it may edify us, to
observe how quasi or half truths and flimsy abstrac-
tions have in their ingenuity, and their novelty in
the growth of thought, lulled temporarily the yearn-
ing for absolute explanation. In this humor we
shall propose a substitute for creation out of
nothing, which shall give full credit to Sufficient
Intelligence while yet saving the vital experience of
the Many.

We saw in Section First, under the hypothesis
that reality is what it is known as, that the sizes
of things are determined by organic lenses, and that
knowledge through the lenses is to that extent ostens-
ibly creative.

The popular supposition is of the One's divinely
creating Many in a time process, and credit herein
is given to some occult activity or fertility from
which things come as out of nothing. Mere know-
ledge seems incompetent to produce, and rather fitted
to witness or attend. In the case of the sizes, as
determined through the organs, the effective power
is left a mystery within or behind the subjective
spirit; but as for the One creating the Many, or
being creditably responsible for the Many, we shall


26 PLURIVERSE

see that in the nature of things, without any dy-
namic action or fertility, the Many belong, and are
potential in the One, as a necessity seen in its nature
from the static viewpoint of Sufficient Intelligence,
whence all things always are.

We are now to suppose a human eye placed just
without the perimeter of the revolving earth, which
would pass it at a speed of 1,000 miles per hour.
In the unity of the intelligence behind the eye there
is the many-ness of 1,000 miles. If now, in the
freedom of our hypothesis, we increase the intelli-
gent unity by enlarging the eye to the size of the
earth, the 1,000 miles, as a reality of organic con-
sciousness (a Many), would fade into a mere poten-
tiality in the unity of the larger consciousness. For
the earth would be, to the larger consciousness, not
larger comparatively than a lady's watch, so slow
that the hour-hand, though taking all day for one
revolution and hardly seen to move, would beat her
two to one. To the Sufficient Intelligence the Many
belong in and are as real as the One.

The One of identity, or pure being, shall hold in-
volved and nullified all difference and form. To il-
lustrate this position:

Taking a bushel of crude stones, we may beat them
down to say three pecks of dust, a smaller bulk ; but
while the crude stones, piled as a cairn upon a windy
knoll, might so endure for many years, the dust in
the same exposure would soon be blown away.

This familiar fact becomes curious when we con-
sider that the particles of dust are likely, each by
itself, to be of the same specific gravity essentially
as the bulk it helped to constitute, if not heavier, for


DUPLEXITY 27

presumably the bulk would have taken fracture where
it was least substantial. But a moment's reflection
warns us that the particle of dust has a larger sur-
face-exposure in proportion to its weight. When
you cut a body in two you expose two new surfaces,
while the weight remains unchanged; and the wind,
having the advantage of pressure upon a greater
superficial area, more easily carries the particle
away.

We are concerned here with two units of identity
in the same environment. A stone is a stone, surely,
but in this experiment it appears that the larger
stone is not only more but more in proportion than
the smaller; and if we ask, in proportion to what?
the answer is, to the show it makes in the sensible
world. From the viewpoint of mere appearance, in-
crease is creative of identity by the degradation or
absorption of form; the accretion of the one bulk
vacates the discretion of the many of the dUst; it
takes in all of their form, which as an abstraction
enhances the identical and concrete. And if identity
appreciates by the accretion and destruction of
form, the supreme One, the identity of totality is,
within, dark and formless; for all externality or
marginality or aught of discretion must disappear —
unless, always, the One is not only one, but other to
itself, and in so far not itself; * e., its "truth" is
contradiction.

We may well rest a moment amid these baffing sub-
tleties to better account for them. They do not ex-
plain; we can at best discover the grounds of their
plausibility. There is no standpoint from which
philosophy can be despised. The cosmos is a mo-


28 PLURIVERSE

mentous affair, and we are ourselves so dever, we
cannot repress the presumption that it can be un-
derstood. We have but to watch the stars to believe
in "perpetual motion," at least with their assistance.
But our uoomediate interest is in the quasi principles
or half-truths, abstractions partway across the dia-
lectic cliasm, which have been meretriciously posed
in their day as explanatory. There is no great risk
of credit in quoting from Pythagoras that number
is the substance of things, or from Aristotle that
matter is by the degradation of form, when we see
Kant with no other first principle than "sponta-
neity" — just an empty word, presuming fertility ; or
see Hegel and Fichte impregnating negation and
self-relation; or see the modern Germans, discom-
fited by a stale personality, depersonalizing the pop-
ular attributes of Grod, and using them sans credit;
or see M. Bergson investing life and time and evo-
lution with all the efficiency of creative intention. We
do not disparage the ingenuity of these professors, at
least not so much as we distrust their veracity, or
regret their shortsightedness in deeming their results
"philosophy."

Resuming consideration of the quasi power of
abstractions: When we reflect upon our utter igno-
rance of the origin of the world's dynamic forces, and
recall that the most ambitious accovmt of the meta-
physical forces halts at an inane "spontaneity" —
a pseudo-fertility of emptiness — or at best at a
"free will" whose freedom is essentially its exemp-
tion from any native influence or tendency — we are
startled and interested by any hint from the dy-


DUPLEXITY 29

namic world that force may be due to liberty. It
seems at first a rather hopeless resource, but some
admissions are necessary to unaccountable fact.

The amateur in dialectic may well need some coach-
ing here, lest he too hastily retort that getting force
out of liberty is nonsense ; the sophist may catch him
if he does not watch out. All talk is dangerous. The
amateur might not hesitate in saying that nothing
can create — he meaning that creation is impossible ;
but the sophist will stare in mock admiration at the
oracle: he is interested in production, and wonders
at this account of it, and he proceeds to magnify it
with his largest lens: "Nothing can create! noth-
ing, nothing, nothing!" By capitalizing nonen-
tity, and "taking you at your word," and pre-
tending that the oracle is worth while, he finds a
position in your amateur negation: nothing,
logically, is "something" («. e. something for dis-
cussion) ; and indeed a professor of capital reputa-
tion has held half the civilized world for a hundred
years staring at the paradox (transcendentally
true) that "negation is positive in its result." The
cue of the dignified skeptic is possibly rather silence
than dogmatism. And as a sop to Hegelians we may
mention an instance where the negative seems to have
positive effect, not merely as logical but as empirical.
We allude to the tacking of a ship against the wind,
an everyday affair.

With the wind blowing, say directly from the west,
the expert skipper faces his sails diagonally to its
pressure, and so, by tacking alternately to the right
and left, glides forward by degrees in the direction
of its very source. When we consider how the water


30 PLURIVERSE

is entirdy negative or inert, while the wind is the only
motive force, the fact that the west wind blows the
vessel to the west calls for an explanation of the
"dialectic" of the skipper, which out of the negative
water achieves his positive advance. Now all this
involves a curious question of our practical experi-
ence of physical motion and momentmn. When I
was young, in almost any attic in our Eastern States
there was liable to be found the debris of some device
for "perpetual motion." The latter is not a neces-
sarily extravagant dream. The stars seem to exem-
plify it; and even if one could not independently
produce momentum for mechanical uses, still with
the help of the motion everywhere apparent he might
hope to "hitch his wagon to a star," and get the ben-
efit of its impulse. And a certain striking fact in
physics encouraged the hope of an absolute produc-
tion of momentum from freedom, as if thereby one
might share the fortune of the stars themselves, how-
ever they come by it.

This fact is certainly occult at least, however it
may be ultimately demonstrated as superficial. In
any event it seems to have been the spur to many
fruitless Yankee inventions. The fact was this:

A pound-weight falling to the platform of a spring
balance-scale will, in a fall of twenty inches, gain
about nine pounds; it will deliver the impact of a
ten poimd weight; or practically it will weigh ten
pounds. Whence are the extra nine pounds? The
earth itself weighs but one pound less while the pound
weight is free and falling ; and of course, to that ex-
tent, "the belt is off," the moon gets away, etc., but
the impact, the blow, the momentum, seems wholly


DUPLEXITY 31

due to time and freedom, which have no material cost.
The hope of inventors has been to so use the momen-
tum gained as to replace the fallen pound for another
fall, with some advantage won for mechanical uses.
But unfortunately the time required to replace the
pound weight is as exacting as the time of the fall-
ing was liberal, and the experiment fails.

The lesson is not unimportant for us. If the
stars are a limited set, the outermost orbs in their
circular courses may advance toward the unlimited
and unoccupied space, against the general gravita-
tion of the system as a whole, in this false hope that
the momentum gained will restore them to perihelium,
so that their motion, however originally given, will
be retained forever. But this hypothesis has no
standing in any rational court. Gravitation ad-
mitted as a general principle of matter will "hold
the universe together" with a vengeance! No gain
of momentum from "freedom," no series of motions
within a limited set of stars, can withhold the whole
system from falling to a single center. There must
be as much gravitation outward as inward, to keep
the stars apart; and the conception of space as
wholly subjective does not reach the problem at all,
for transcendental and empirical realities alike are
necessarily subject to the same a 'priori rules. Si-
dereal orbits are possible only in a limitless field.

Still this growth and momentum, born of freedom
(which metaphysically costs just nothing), awaken
curious reflection. You may see a woodsman with
his axe by a mere twist of his wrist sever a three-
inch limb by use of momentum, though the steady
pressure of all his strength might not sever it in an


32 PLURIVERSE

hour. So a man with one blow of a sledge will crush
a stone that may have upheld a temple for a thou-
sand years. Why did not the still pressure of the
temple accumulate momentum from time, as does
the free swing of the sledge or the axe, or the falling
pound?

And there is a psychological momentum of the
same kind. A man may wind up his resolution for
an emergency, as the boy cries "One, two, three,"
and "Go !»

There is such an instance in the play of "Othello,"
which Shaksperian critics seem to have disre-
garded. Just before stabbing himself, and after
having protested his hard fate, the Moor says:

Set you down this;
And say besides — that in Aleppo once.
Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog.
And smote him — thus.

I find no historical warrant for the precedent here
cited. I rather suspect that the great dramatist
depended upon his audience to realize that in this
rigmarole, possibly preconcerted for such an occa-
sion, the desperate hero was screwing his courage to
the sticking point.

Our Americans may well regard it as an endorse-
ment of our ostensible freedom that a little more than
a century of it has evoked more patented inventions
than are recorded in the whole history of England,
saying nothing of our more liberal religious thought.


DUPLEXITY 33

We may infer that idle freedom is a more prolific
mother of invention than is the proverbial necessity.
An Italian peasant enters the lofty vestibule of
St. Peter's with bowed and uncovered head; before
him, in the dim religious light, the pillared silence
stoops from arches vast to uplift the melody of the
finest voices to be gathered in Europe, while haply
the great organ, yearning in the pathos of its theme,
shudders at the memory of Calvary and the Via Dol-
orosa. On every side around him appear the loving
contributions of a thousand years of art and culture.
Who or what is he among these assthetic treasures,
which for his unsophisticated reverence have an equal
date with Andes and Ararat, to question or to criti-
cise the doctrine that he hears ? An original thought
if he could have one would be anomalous, even pro-
fane; he is both mentally and materially overborne
and outclassed. Meantime, in a land far from this
sacred establishment,

A land where the mountains are nameless.
And the rivers all run God knows where.

Like the lives that are erring and aimless
And the deaths that just hang by a hair,

the plainsman, with his rope and his gun, takes the
withers of the bay mare lovingly between his cal-
loused knees for the long lope that covers her thirty
leagues between sun and sun. Your thousand years
are but as yesterday to him, and if he wants a
church he must build it, under no other authority
or inspiration than his own.

These philosophical controversies, so confident and
at times so bitter, what are they more or other than


34 PLURIVERSE

cultured and temperamental preferences vibrating
between the static and dynamic viewpoints, as in
turn matter and form, identity and diiference, and
all the other nominal abstractions are allowed to
exchange places in an incorrigible duplexity which
in turn stultifies its claimant as of an ultimate gen-
eralization? How shall one claim the "world" as
thus or this and no other, with the deeps of being as
other behind his eye? What hope of explanation re-
mains when the last word of dialectics shows an
equal alternity of being and not-being, identity and
difference, reality and appearance, and finally of
reason and unreason?

The coil is about us, and at once we are and are
not the coil. Can this be "true"? or if true is it
worth while? Since it seems that whatever we may
say will from some point of view pass as true, we
shall venture the paradox that chance is the only
sure thing.

The vulgar reverence which accounts him an im-
becile who accepts anything as referable to other
than personality, or in fact to fate, is subject to
criticism as a psychological and possibly erroneous
conceit ; and we take occasion to say a word for
chance, as quite as explanatory as any other hy-
pothesis — as essentially just, and certainly exempt
from the whims and vagaries whose possibility is the
chief prerogative of spontaneous and independent
personality.

It can be only through positive injustice and par-
tiality if all being and becoming have not an equal
chance; for chance is a daughter of justice, if jus-


DUPLEXITY 35

tice should be, and her deformity would be a scandal
to the cosmic empyrean.

Chance could be only half-bad at the worst —
surely as apt to be good as bad — and experience,
in all our human policy, finds it dependable and suf-
ficiently fair. Be it as blind as you please, all
business defers to it. And why not? Is it not
obvious that only some monstrous malignity could
permanently overbalance the normal equality and
indifference of things in themselves? Whi/ should
they go crazy, and destroy value (so opposing the
Good, which was Plato's first principle of possibility
and continuance) ?

(We are not assuming to explain, but proposing
to the reader the contingency under which the ques-
tion, why things are, is no more important than the
question, why should they not be.)

With three true dice, marked respectively G, o,
and d, you will, as a rule, in six throws get the name,
God, with no intention of so doing. With the ap-
propriate nine dice and letters you will in 362,880
throws get the sentence, God is good; that is to say,
the fact will be extraordinary and remarkable if you
do not; failure of such a result would prompt the
player to seek, and usually to find a malformation of
the dice. The sentiment suggested to him by the
disposition of the letters infers no bearing of its
intention on the result. It would be irrational, say-
ing you should not expect such a result. Similarly
reasoning, the elements being given, in x throws
one should get the universe (if it were a whole) ; and
any sentiment of wonder arising at its contempla-
tion would be overborne by the afterthought that.


36 PLURIVERSE

given any conservative principle of value, there is
an equal wonder why it should not be.

The popular doctrine of evolution is a coarse-hand
script of the persistence of value, or the Good,
whereby the fittest survives in heredity. Given
such a conservative principle, in the profusion of
nature which aifords a host of germs as against one
that survives, the aggressive force of the fittest must
hereditarily improve the species by selecting the most
vivacious ; and not so in general, but in every detail
of animal organization the conservative principle
must adopt the betterments which happen; and in
the limitless time, which costs nothing, chance and
heredity will have rationally contributed all that,
afterwards, appeals to asthetic appreciation.

We are not to wonder then, when the aesthetic
parasite, ingenious and capable on his own account,
flatters his vanity as a representative or model of
the genius of the cosmos, and attributes all things to
personality — forgetting, or rather not thinking,
that under criticism personality is the greatest
wonder of all.

Thus we may readily suppose him misconstruing,
under a claim of "final cause," an appreciation at
the end of things into an intention at their begin-
ning.

The reliability and permanence of chance are the
most consolatory elements of philosophy. The no-
tion that, left to chance, all would go wild and un-
dependable, miscalculates experience, and (as before
noticed) calls for a positive malignity to over-
weigh the just indifference and stolidity or essen-


DUPLEXITY 37

tial inertia of things in themselves. There needs a
positive and peremptory why the ace should come up
an inconvenient number of times. Justice is balance.
The Good is not best, upon the whole; it does not
appear to have been deserved, and it is unjust, by
comparison, to the indifferent and commonplace; it
shows a heat in the bosom of fate.


CHAPTER II
IDEALISM

THE wbrd idealism has been so drawled through
perfunctory and irresponsible discourse that
one must speak by the card if he would not
be undone by the reckless equivocation. Fortunately
the most fashionable authority in the premises has
left a categorical definition of the term that will
bear criticism as well as will any statement of an
insoluble problem.

In the year 1840 the editor of Hegel's works is-
sued a small volume specially composed or selected
by Karl Rosencranz, presenting Hegel's original out-
line of his course of lectures in the gymnasium at
Niirnberg in 1808-11. We quote from his exposi-
tion of the "Phenomenology of Spirit," as delivered
in the second year of the course :

"Our ordinary knowing has before Itself only the
object which it knows; it does not at first make an
object of the knowing itself. But the whole which
is extant in the act of knowing includes the object
and the ego that knows, and the relation between
them, namely consciousness.

"In philosophy, the determinations of the know-
ing include not only the determinations of objective
things (as such) but also a determination of the
knowing to which they belong — this likewise In com-

S3


IDEALISM 39

mon with things. In other words (always there are
other words), they include bpth objective and sub-
jective determinations; or rather (sic) definite spe-
cies of relation of the object and the subject to
each other.

"Since things and their determinations are both
in the same knowing, it is quite possible, on the one
hand, to view the same (the original) things as in
and for themselves outside of consciousness, given
to the latter as foreign and already existing material
for it; on the other hand, however, the view is pos-
sible that consciousness itself posits this world, and
produces or modifies the determinations of the same,
through its mediating relations and self-activity,
either wholly or in part. The first mode of view is
called Realism, the second Idealism.

"The subject, more definitely apprehended, is
Spirit (the mind). It is phenomenal when essen-
tially relating to an existing object; it is so far
consciousness. The science of consciousness is
therefore called the phenomenology of Spirit.

"But the mind, according to its self-activity
within itself and in relation to itself independent of
all relation to others, is considered in the science of
mind proper, or psychology."

This private outline for a course of public lec-
tures is a kind of soliloquy, in which the lecturer
forecasts clearly for his own guidance the substance
to be amplified in his future discourse. Its rugged
and categorical sentences call down literature from
its vague and aesthetic atmosphere to scientific analy-
sis of experience, and the precise meaning we intend
in the language that we use. We find that we have


40 PLURIVERSE

been making objective topics of particulars which are
internal and spiritual, or else are so blended of
matter and mixed as to fail of right identification.

Experience more and more aggravated the an-
tagonism between sense and reliable understanding,
as to whether reality was external or internal, or
partly each. Things of many kinds, which should
be real and identical of themselves, not only change
constantly in time but become different through their
environment and the subjective conditions of their
observers. The summer haze doubles the size of the
sun, and a moral haze magnifies the two mites of the
widow. "Things are not what they seem"; we are
at a loss in locating reality, whether mental, mate-
rial or moral.

A tree falls in the woods, and there is a roar — i.e.
if any creature hears it, but not otherwise. The
discrepancy here, between the popular and the ideal
notions, comes from neglect of the distinction be-
tween sound, as in our experience, and vibration of
the air, which becomes sound only as affecting audi-
tory nerves ; and this prompts the awkward asser-
tion of the idealist, that there is no sound unheard.
But when he says there can be no pain unfelt, the
former assertion seems less anomalous. So when
we say a lemon is sour, we are only locating ex-
ternally our own sensation; the lemon will not be
sour if left alone. We find that we have given to
experience an externality which must be identically
lived, to be at all — not but that there may be ex-
ternal ingredients involved with the experience.

So in the case of certain relatives. We say of a
certain body, it is hot, or it is cold ; but it is neither


IDEALISM 41

hot nor cold by itself, but only by a standard. The
same body may seem hot or cold according to the
patient's temperature. A cold-blooded fish may be
warm in water that would chill an animal to death.
There is no absolute thermometer on which cold is
a degree.

Now while this proposition of Hegel, that "Con-
sciousness may posit this world," is altogether too
rank when taken for the world's rational explana-
tion — for consciousness, to be explanatory, should
be wise and designing and efficient, and every sane
man knows that he does not designingly and volun-
tarily posit his world — and further, there is no
popular or even esoteric understanding of a uni-
versal consciousness to which the positing could be
rationally attributed (and the rationale of all con-
sciousness is still left as an unknown root), still, I
say, the categorical sentence, "Consciousness posits
this world," is capable of a striking defence, and one
quite satisfactory to a faith that will admit pri-
marily the miracle of it all, or hold with the good
Bishop Berkeley, that all consciousness and all ideas
are due to the instant inspiration of God. For I
must hold that so far as *'this world" can be re-
solved to color, form, size and tangibility — and I
will include all difference whatsoever — It is deter-
mined through (if not by) consciousness. But this
declaration shall evade, so far as radical explanation
is concerned, any power or fertility or cause behind
consciousness, and (for the moment) any^ account of
the objective and historical order of experience in
whose presence alone consciousness is found to de-
termine for spirits the things of this world.


42 PLURIVERSE

Beginning with color, I say categorically that
color is determined by the eye ; I do not mean caused
or produced in an explanatory sense, but only that
it is phenomenally according to the eye, and awaits
its presence.

In voicing my experience I have to assume a role
of authority here, because my personal vision, al-
though not singular, is rather extraordinary, exem-
plifying a binocular paralogism, in which quite fre-
quently each of my eyes sees for itself, making for
me two objects out of one; and either of these ob-
jects is the reality, as confirmed by its tangibility,
although they differ in color. When I look at a
lighted lamp, say seven or eight feet away, I see two
lamps, a foot apart, one giving a white or clear light,
the other appearing yellow. An ordinary iron stove
has for my left eye, singly, the color common for
both eyes when in normal focus, but to the right
eye singly it appears bronze. Nickel ornaments are
to my right eye of a beautiful brass. Surely my
eyes determine these colors, even as stained glass
colors the landscape; but the wonder is that the
lens of the eye, unlike the glass with its one color,
discriminates a myriad of tints and shades.

But it is not the mere color of an object that
concerns me most. When I see two frames of one
picture on my wall, and can hold my focus on either
of them, I advance and place my hand upon it as
the real frame, and am ready to stake and soul

that I touch the real.

This conception of the phenomenality or ideality
of objects becomes yet more impressive when we con-
sider their size. Here we have the whole city claimed


IDEALISM 43

and owned and mapped to the fraction of an inch,
and recorded in the courts, according to standard
measures that are guarded with locks and seals.
An inch is an inch and a pound is a pound hy law.
If the earth should lose part of its gravity unaware,
all justice would be frustrated. The merchant who
had contracted to deliver a pound would instantly
become an idealist ; your pound is not such in itself,
but is related to and determined by an external in-
tention ; it is to be adjusted to the scheme of things,
like Shylock's bond.

The literal truth of a size in and of itself would
set the whole world crazy. Here is a pea — the
whole race of men are of one opinion as to its size,
as established in a universal environment; its altera-
tion would derange the procession of events. But
the truth is that this magnitude of the pea is but an
arbitrary selection from its myriads of sizes, in this
case determined by the common visual lens. This
the true size ! or the real size ! Place it in the micro-
scope and instantly it shows the size of a cannon
ball. Is this a trick, an illusion? So far from it,
we have lived the illusion hitherto. The glass has
not merely exaggerated or distorted the features
visible to the naked eye; the ball has grown, not
like a bladder at the expense of its walls, but as
the womb grows, essentially; new features and per-
haps living creatures appear upon it. If any credit
is to be allowed for beauty and ingenuity and use,
the experience demonstrates the mechanical lens as
an improvement on the natural eye, yielding, if not
an ultimate size, at least a higher grade of appre-
ciation or the assumed reality of size, as somewhat


44 PLURIVERSE

in and of itself. At any rate the fact is manifest
that size is phenomenal, and determined by physi-
cal organism. Consciousness does "posit" it.

This is a simple truth, comparatively stale, to be
sure, amid the growing wonders of science, but if
the reflective mind will philosophize and make the
most of it the inferences are overwhelming. The
moment we admit that size is according to the lens
of vision, "things in themselves" become conjectural.

The ideation of form is rather handicapped than
staminated by the intrusion of tangibility, until both
are subjectivized. Plato, being pressed for a defi-
nition of color, ventured the opinion that color is
"an effluence of form commensurate with sight, and
sensible"; we should say, rather, an effluence of sur-
face; and tha,t we rather think than see form, which
is a kind of eclectic construction. Of course sense
and understanding are inseparable, but when we pro-
pose analysis we are well advised to keep them sepa-
rate. Even a worm or a clam is not so exclusively
sensuous as not to show some understanding when
its ground is jarred; but it seems a fair distinction
to say that while a realist knows what he sees, the
idealist sees what he knows — or that sense is
amenable to identity, while difference is due to
thought. Perhaps one cannot see what he does not
know, but he surely may know what he does not see
— for instance, familiar things when his eyes are
closed, or in the darkness of the night. He knows
(or at least assumes that he knows) by memory and
conception, while he has no corroborating percep-
tion, and may be deceived.

We shall find, upon due reflection, that we have


IDEALISM 45

been very inconsiderate in our notions of form. For
instance, we have a general notion of a table, ob-
viously due to the average height of our viewpoint,
and the ordinary position and use of the article. But
we may assume that there are creatures on the floor,
and on the ceiling of the room, to which the table
presents a very diiferent formation; those overhead
may have never seen the legs, and those below may
have never seen the various objects which the table is
made to support. Theoretically the table has num-
berless viewpoints, from either of which it has a dif-
ferent form — constantly different, as well as also
successively different by natural change.

Now as no one of these viewpoints can claim an
authenticity superior to that of any other, the table
has no integrity of form, taken as an observed thing
in, or of, or by itself ; all of its forms are solipsisms,
each peculiar to a different intelligence. The thing
in itself therefore fades into a mere position in the
objective order of nature, identical only as a reliable
potentiality in whose presence one of the table-forms
becomes actual in the presence of a homogeneous
spirit.

For the idealist, identity is blind; the "truth" of
reality is distinction, which can be only in intelli-
gence. It is very old philosophy, that "one" is made
by limiting — made ; the distinction is vital. There
is no dead limit-ed; there is only the imlimited and
the limiting. Draw with chalk a circle on a piece of
cloth ; the circle is limiting, or limit ; but if you ask
for the limited, the only answer is that it is essentially
the unlimited, the cloth, which is the same without as
within the circle. For idealism, distinction is alive,


46 PLURIVERSE

vital. The difference of two things is not a property
of either, but is rather the property of that which
relates them, or holds them in distinction. Here are
two stones, distinguished as the big one and the little
one ; are they such in and of themselves ? Surely, no ;
for I can change either as such by increasing or di-
minishing the other. Or in the case of number : here
are six counters — are they six in themselves? Each
is now a sixth of the number; if I surreptitiously
remove one, I do not intrinsically affect the others,
yet each of them will become a fifth ; and if a thing is
indifferently a sixth or a fifth, or is the same whether
it is number six or number five, it can hardly claim
number in itself. Number is a property of some one
who can count.

So form is not a dead objective thing in itself, that
may persist without thinking; it is not of stuff, but
of mental relation. Here is a "puzzle picture,
showing an Arab and a camel; find another Arab."
Around the two obvious figures the artist seems to
have indulged in scribbling, mere trash to transient
observation, but which, nevertheless, is all that is to
be merely seen. If you find the Arab in question you
will have constructed his form by selection and unifi-
cation, after which the form has become visible. We
draw a triangle on a blackboard, and habitually
assume that we see it by the eye, regardless of its
idea, or the genius of its construction. But can a
horse see a triangle? Take its base line: why shall
he connect that with the two converging sides above?
Why not rather affect the parallel with the edge of
the board below? How shall he care where those lines
go or end, while there is no form in his mind? He can


IDEALISM 4T

no more see a triangle than he could see a picture of
the Crucifixion. He has not the thought-forms
through which the rhapsodies of sense become things.

The idealist will contend that only the idea, or the
class, can be real and consistent, while the particular
or participant is contradictory and confused; that
the general cannot be asserted of the particular
thing, but at best of thought or spirit only.

Idealism seems to have originated with the Greeks
over the question whether the class or universal was
merely an aggregation of particulars, each a sepa-
rate value individually, or a unit from which their
value came by participation. There are various
beautiful things, but whence the common adjective
that determines the class, beautiful? Is it an entity
that can be thought as by itself? Taking the largest
generality, we assume an entity of the many; but
when we ask for the reality, instead of the name —
when we ask "Many what?" we discover that the
many are a mere rhapsody and confusion, of which
the whole stock and substance is unity — it is noth-
ing but ones, and is itself nothing, if not resolved to
one. It was a question between Socrates and Par-
menides, whether everything had or helped to con-
stitute a class, or took stock in an Idea. Socrates
favored a certain objectivity in beauty and truth
and justice, as general Ideas that could have partic-
ipating specimens, but at such examples as filth or
nastiness he demurred ; they seemed wholly subjective
postulates or opinions. There Is nothing against the
real contents of filth, or even nastiness; It Is only
matter out of place ; a basket of garbage may be of
royal cuisine, only broken and disordered — every


48 PLURIVERSE

bit of it a dainty morsel by itself. The nastiness is
in our appreciation of its incongruity with conven-
tional fitness. But, then, could there be ideas wholly
subjective? — and so forth.

We yield too readily to the claim and appearance
of motion — perhaps too readily to the "science"
that denies it. A wheel roUing on the rails at sixty
miles an hour certainly presents as sure a demonstra-
tion of motion as the nature of things may afford —
the wheel going bodily on the line of its route, and
at the same time revolving on its axis. But ques-
tions arise: If the wheel moves, it must all move,
or else go to pieces? It must. And the track is
stiU? It is. But if the wheel moves, while in con-
tact with the motionless track, the wheel would grind
the track ; but now a changing particle of the wheel
at the bottom serves as a pivot for the motion of
the other particles. Strip off the rim of a wheel
and roll it on its spoke: we see at once that each
spoke holds its position on the track until the next
spoke comes down. If the wheel were lifted from the
track and then revolved, this motionless part would
fly to the centre and the other parts would go up
and down and right and left around it; set the
wheel upon the track again, and then the forward
moving centre assumes also the backward motion
of the bottom, the top doubles Its speed, and the
bottom is as still as the track.

But stillness, and centre, and bottom are all gen-
eral ideas, which refuse sensible expression. Is there
a bottom or a centre of a wheel, as a material thing?
Or are these conceptions in the mind only? Surely
the latter. The perimeter of the wheel is a curve,


IDEALISM 49

and no section of it can be so short but it will curve
up from the track and present the anomaly of being
both top and bottom; and no portion of the wheel
can be so small as to be wholly a centre, but if sens-
ible it will be so large as to have an ideal centre of
its own.

Now in declaring the subjectivity or ideality of
form we found the integrity of the idea threatened
with frustration by the tangibility of its ground;
we can sensuously touch the material that owns and
presents the form, and so prove its objectivity as
awaiting consciousness, rather than determined by
it ; let vision be never so illusive, touch seems a sure
test of substance ; let the night be ever so dark, touch
proves the objective reality of things whose inherent
form awaits only the kindly light to reveal them.

Well, sensation, that involves pain and pleasure,
should seem the surest criterion of reality. But
somehow, as at the discharge of a gun the report
comes later than the fact, the scientists will insist
that the nerves carry sensation only 180 feet per
second, so that a material man might be dead before
he knew it, as they tell of a star still visible that-
perished thousands of years ago.

But that touch is less phenomenal than vision,
that its objects show a substantiality not relative
to or determined by subjective organization, is an
untenable hypothesis. The attestations of sub-
stance by tangibility and impenetrability are vari-
ously contradictory. We have but to notice the dif-
ferent penetrative forces of electricity and light.
Light goes through glass, and stops at iron, while
electricity goes through iron and stops at glass. If


60 PLURIVERSE

our visual faculties were electrical, glass would be
phenomenal, and iron would be no object; while if
our vision had the penetrative quality of light, iron
would be an object, while pure glass would be in-
visible. We see only what we cannot see through.

We gather from these reflection the potential sig-
nificance of Hegel's definition of idealism, as the doc-
trine that "consciousness posits this world," with the
careful reservation, "wholly or in part." Only the
"absolute" idealists, of the Fichtean order, go so
far as to say that there is nothing in the visible
and tangible world but what is placed there either
by or through consciousness. According to Kant
there is something at least mentionable as a thing
by itself, but how qualified he neither knew nor ostens-
ibly cared to know. His vocation was science, not
explanation, and science as a fact for criticism, re-
gardless of its unknown root. But the more mod-
erate idealists — such as appreciate the reflections
above noticed — are for their own part very willing
to avoid the responsibility of consciously making
this wondrous world, or even their own share of it,
and insist that there must be somewhat independent
of our parasite consciousness — some objective and
historical order, in the presence of which, and ac-
cording to which, consciousness has or makes or
determines these phenomenal revelations. Either
this or else the whole fact is a divine miracle.

The static and dynamic viewpoints are likely to
remain in contrast, if not In opposition, as long as
men shall countenance the possibility of a particular
and of a universal intelligence, or the masque of
humanity shall continue. That we live in the new-


IDEALISM 61

ness of time, that creation is continuous, that things
are born and grow old, and that life in its process is
vitalized and realized by sensations of immediate and
temporal and even sacred experience — all new, and
with the prestige of a divine accomplishment of his-
torical purpose and intrinsic worth — it were stulti-
fication to deny; the denial would be a flippant as-
sertion that we are but such stuff as dreams are
made on and that we do not really know, or feel,
or exist. (Yet to deny the supremacy of reason and
SuflBcient Intelligence, in which all things must al-
ways be and be known and felt, is to declare a con-
dition in which existence itself would be so pre-
carious and confused as to be hardly worth while,
and one requiring a suspense of judgment at its very
best.)

The dilemma is the same, or analogous, between
idealism and realism. If we agree with Parmenides,
that "one thing are being and thinking"; or with
Protagoras, that "man" (as intelligence) "is the
measure of all things" ; or with Hegel and the earlier
Fichte that the absolute totality is the self-relation
of "thought"; or with Kant, that our external
world is projected from (or at least determined
through) our personal organization, and that our
objects are not things in themselves; or finally, with
more modern critics, that there are no things in
themselves — common sense and sane metaphysics
alike require some account of the region where things
at least seem to be, and some sort of objective and
historical order of reality in the positions before
which, and some way determined by which, the in-
dividual spirits are so uniformly given the same


52 PLURIVERSE

phenomena in the same place and time. It is cer-
tainly remarkable, if spirits project their own phe-
nomena, that in any given presence or position they
all project the same apparitions, in the same stages
of growth and decay. There should be either a
unity of inspiration from behind the different
spirits or else there is presumably an objective integ-
rity before them.

For example, take the discovery of our planet
Neptune. At least two astronomers had realized
that in the objective consistency of the solar system
there was required in a certain position the gravita-
tion proper to a certain bulk of matter. The prac-
tical fact of the "thing" (Neptune) had never ap-
peared in human knowledge, and was realized only
after science and mechanism had caught up with a
reality which historically preceded them.

These contrasting viewpoints of idealism and real-
ism are as such quite as defensive severally as are
those of the static and dynamic, and it is but fair
to materialism, in the face of the idealist contention
that consciousness posits the apparent world, to
consider occasionally what a wonderful world it is,
and what a staggering proposition to the average
consciousness its production or even its comprehen-
sion must be. We have no use for the truism that
each man's world is "all the world to him." We are
not solipsists ; we have to believe in other people, and
in history, in "alien energy," and a venerable estab-
lishment at which, as ephemeral visitors, we may take
our glimpse, question its conditions, its origin, pur-
pose and permanence, and inconsequently pass on.

It is under the spur of these or like considerations


IDEALISM 63

that solid people like Mr. Spencer revolt at "the in-
sanities of idealism." Yet Spencer himself, when
philosophising, will not forego these anomalies. In
his "Psychology" he says: "What we are conscious
of as properties of matter^ even down to its weight
and resistance, are but subjective affections pro-
duced by objective agencies which are unknown and
unknowable." No idealist can say more ; and if any
property of matter is not such a subjective affection,
but a reality apart from subjective spirit, the sen-
sible world may exist as truly without experience as
within it.

But the sense anomaly will persist. Here is a
great painting which has for the moment but an un-
cultured observer. Now I am free and prompt to
say that color, form, size, tangibility (and even all
difference whatsoever if you please) are determina-
tions of conscious spirit, and that apart from such
determinations there are no "things," any more than
there are color and beauty and perspective in the
night on the hind side of the earth ; something must
come there — light as well as vision — to afford in-
telligent experience ; still the ground of possible ex-
perience may be objectively determined. The culture
of the boor is the measure of the picture only for him.
The picture has objective potentiality for a larger
culture; and so the idealist, with his one dogmatic
and unquestionable claim, may well inquire, if reality
evolves "things" only according to his subjective
categories, the material limiting, if not the formal
constructing element of experience may be on the
objective side so far as he is concerned. A critic
might say to the average perfunctory idealist, even


64 PLURIVERSE

as he might to the boor before the picture, "you see
all there is in it for you, and ignore what a funda-
mental explanation requires of its position — in
which event you are a solipsist and a bigot, up in the
tree of life indeed, but sawing off the limb that sup-
ports you."

Idealism and realism, in their literature, have
shown a very unnecessary and even contemptuous
antagonism. The idealist, obsessed with his right
claim that objects are not yet "things", in them-
selves, seems to the realist to be clearing his perspec-
tive of everything save, perhaps, of subjective dream
— at any rate that he makes the visible world "in
itself" unreal ; whereas the true idealist should mean
no such fact ; he opposes not realism but materialism.
Fully admitting the external reality, he philosophises
the making of the reality, claiming that experience is
not wholly due to mere crude stuff, but partly as
involving soul in the world, and possibly God; that
experience of phenomena is a composition of matter
and form, and that the matter becomes "things" (out
of the formless dark) only in the presence of divine
light and organic vision. But idealism has been
mainly (and perhaps helplessly) at fault, in not
scientifically explaining what the noumenal ground,
the matter-side of the exhibition, is, before the show,
and in itself — what it is that impregnates the posi-
tion in the objective historical order, and makes it
potential of the same "things" to all organized
spirits alike in the presence of the same position.
Kant's idealism is not opposed to the reality of
things but only to their utter materiality :

"The ideality of space and time (and of their con-


IDEALISM 65

tents) leaves the truthfulness of our experience (as
well as the ground or cause of it) quite untouched,
because we are equally sure of it, whether these
forms are inherent in things by themselves, or by
necessity in our institutions of them only."

It is just here that "absolute" idealism puts in its
claim, that the noumenal side of reality is totally im-
plicated in the divine subjectivity, and that matter
or the negative shall have no essential credit in it-
self, but only as critically posed in the shape of a
non-ego in the ego regarded as self-related spirit.
The exploitation of this idea into a system, involving
the working world, became the life vocation of Fichte,
and continued until its possibilities and as well his
own powers were hopelessly exhausted, and ended in
his renunciation of the whole problem, in his "Voca-
tion of Man."

"I know that if I am not merely to play another
perplexing game with this system, but intend really
and practically to adopt it, I must refuse obedience
to the voice within me. ... I will not do so. I
will freely accept the vocation which this impulse as-
signs to me. I will restrict myself to the position of
natural thought, in which this impulse (faith) places
me, and cast from me all those over-refined and subtle
inquiries which alone could make me doubtful of its
truth."

(This determination changed his claim of knowl-
edge as self-relation, or knowledge of knowledge, to
simple faith in Kant's canon of pure reason, "I
think.")

Yet malgre this renunciation by Fichte, absolute
idealism is the only goal and fall accomplishment of


66 PLURIVERSE

dialectic philosophy. The soul cannot pose as a
mere spectator of any object, however real. It must
draw the object up into itself, where no mere copy
or representation of it before the Highest shall, un-
der the name of "truth," pretend to absolute science ;
only identity with the object can be trusted. Truth,
to the absolute, is a false pretence. Its very name
stamps it as paper, not gold which cannot be substi-
tuted, however conventionally represented. The
question is about knowledge, not about correct or
passable likenesses ; and truth is only asserted of like-
ness, not of identity with the object. Truth can
pertain only to representation, which can never be
equivalent to the genuine original. It is a word too
much, unless the object as subject is self-related.

I do not observe that our materialists, who are
halted by the spiritualists' claim that no matter can
be refined to mind (since substance cannot serve as
relation), have made full use of these phenomena of
light and color, which were to Plato the prime won-
ders of the world. For how indeed can we think of
light, at whose presence all the form and beauty of
the world appear, as less than half of what we call
intelligence? Without it "subjective" vision were
impossible ; we cannot imagine color. Nor are com-
pound colors chemical. A blue ferruginous sand and
a yellow silicons sand combined will make a green,
although all the particles retain their integrity, and
can be separated by a magnet. And the common
light, which plays such an intellectual part in the
phenomena of beauty, is a chemical element ; it is as
rankly material as any acid, as well appears in its
action upon collodion in the making of a photo-


IDEALISM 57

graph, and in its mechanical effects upon vegetation.
The distinction shall be very fine between such sub-
stance and relation, in a mechanical green.

All our conceptions of light are crude and imma-
ture. How inconsiderate and puerile is our notion
of a star : a bright point, sending a ray to us. But
is it not at the same time sending a ray to every point
of the universe? Not a singular gleam, but a limit-
less globe of light — an atmosphere, yet to be dis-
tinguished among a myriad of such, and occupying
the same space. Our star is but one of its infinite
manyness. And we read that it may be only the
ghost of a star at last.

If the apparition of the star be really a ghost,
there is a globe of light (assuming it to have had a
beginning) in which a dark sphere is swiftly expand-
ing a ring of light which still contains it.

Frankly speaking, it is not in our present voca-
tion to explain, even if we easily could, the confusion
in which our concession to the plausibility of Ideal-
ism may seem to have involved our discussion. The
purpose has been rather to philosophically show
wherein philosophy has failed. And just here par-
ticularly should appear its shortcoming, as having
not clearly distinguished between realism and "ma-
terialism" — a notion beyond the possibility of
thought.

Kant took pains to acknowledge and give warn-
ing that an idealist proper does not deny the reality
of what he depreciates as mere phenomena (to whose
basic stuff he was presently indifferent), but in-
sists upon the intellectual and relational element in
its composition. Said Kant: "It must not be sup-


58 PLURIVERSE

posed that an idealist is one who denies the existence
of external objects of the senses; all he does is to
deny that the existence is known by immediate per-
ception, and to infer that we can never become per-
fectly certain of their reality by any experience
whatever."

Kant himself was stoically indifferent to the un-
settling consequences of his doctrine. If it made
knowledge solipsism — if the things of this world
are only as they are in spiritual appreciation that
may be commingled of conception, memory, dream
and illusion — he would but fall back upon his sure
method, and warn the acolyte of the ineluctable nec-
essity of empirical experience, and of the fact that
only the accompanying assurance of perceptive sense
could make a whole of knowledge.

When the materialist says then, "these things are
real, whether observed or not, and are no less real in
the dark on the hind side of the earth," the idealist
may well inquire for his meaning, not only as to the
"things" but as to reality itself. For consider the
things as to their sizes: the materialist will not
long persist in the integrity of these sizes, but
if he does not hold the things to their apparent
sizes they will vanish; they have none of his
"matter" if they have no determined size; all
that he can claim of matter without color, form,
tangibility, and above all, difference — all of which
we have found determined by organs — falls into
the curiosity of what causes the mental experi-
ence, and matter, as dead, negative stuff, gives little
promise of explanation.

It will be but courtesy on our part to kneel in


IDEALISM 69

spirit and confess the fatuity of any presumption of
having made explanation easier. Newton may find
a pretty pebble on the shore, still lost in wonder as
to what the great ocean covers. We rather like the
notion, shallow though it be, of primordial forms in
the elements of things, which crystallize readily of
themselves: it spares a little of anxious intention.
And we are comforted by the rupture of aristocratic
heredity, when we see that a divine descent through
the line of the acorn is not absolutely necessary in
the lineage of the oak : since, as we have noticed, both
root and branch of the same plant may have grown
out of its environment, and represented an illegiti-
mate succession. But after evolution has con-
gratulated itself on its main stay of the survival of
fitness, through the push of self-love — seen the
mere paws get fingers and indurated nails, finally
reinforced by the afterthought of a thumb, to en-
close (in order to climb a vine, for instance) ; after
it has seen the blind anxiety of the pushing worm
wear through the skin to a focus so sensitive and
responsive to the interest within that it has developed
a lens and can really see, realized the cordage and
leverage of the bones and joints as time and the vital
push have accomplished the creature for his posi-
tion — all this and so much more — then to see the
wonder of all wonders, the recreation of the species
— to see the mere orgasm of the cock and the hen,
drawing from all the streams which out of the wild
time delivered this creature, deposit in an egg a white
speck in which the whole history is recorded in a
potentiality so vital that mere impersonal heat may
in twenty-one days render it actual as a bird of


60 PLURIVERSE

paradise — there philosophy, as we regard it, should
consent to one very important fact: it is most un-
likely that any man (at best any man that we have
known or heard of) has in his intelligence any cos-
mic relation to this world, or as an inheriting son
has any unique claim to the estate. Yet that he
may have a glimpse of the record we surely know.

Another thought which may be a part of philoso-
phy hereafter is that time must be regarded as a
dynamic principle. These wonders of history and
development argue so long a process, give a sense
of so much being due to process, that when we re-
flect that time as such can have no beginning, we
seem driven to regard it as in itself fertile, objective
and concrete, and to conceive Idealism as a private
affair. A cultured appreciation finds the world so
utterly beyond finite comprehension that, taken as
a subjective effect, it would incur a contempt that
is due only to the subject himself. While Idealism,
for its ingenuity, will be ever safe from the charge
of "insanity," it is most likely that the faith in ob-
jective reality will prevail,'' and that the ultimate

1 There was a piquant and memorable controversy, lasting
more than twenty years, between Thomas Hobbes (author of
"The Leviathan," etc.) and certain of the professors of Oxford
University, over the possibility of the quadrature of the circle,
which has a metaphysical interest as involving the relative au-
thority of sense and understanding, and so liable to personal
predilection and preference. The discussion was at first con-
ducted in Latin, with classic dignity and decorum, but waxing
hot in consequence of opposing viewpoints — so hot that Mr.
Hobbes, arguing from the sensuous and popular side, did not
hesitate at calling his opponents not only fools but liars — he
decided that he could more roundly abuse them in their native
tongue, and continued the contest in English, whereat the Cons


IDEALISM 61

duplexity will be of time and space as respectively
male and female principles.

Having granted all that may be rightly claimed
in Hegel's definition of idealism, we have to notice
what it lacks of explanation, in the large discourse
of reason.


rather wittily, if not very elegantly, protested that he had
resorted to Billingsgate becaiise "he had not the right Latin
for stinking fish."

(This, by the way, was a rather disingenuous claim of such
thorough scholars, for Hobbes' translations of both Latin and
Greek have been generally approved. Pope declared that his
versions of Homer and Thucydides were the best ever written.
Hobbes' idiosyncracy, if such it was, is best expressed by Sir
James Mackintosh as his inability to discriminate between the
intellectual and the emotive faculties of man, as determining
metaphysical certainty.)

It was this peculiarity, perhaps, that led to Mr. Hobbes' final
comment upon the refinements of his adversaries, that "if he
had been as learned as they were he would probably have
known no more than they did."

This jibe appears superficially no more than a retort of
conmion sense and experience upon highbrow technicality and
finesse; but it is this and much more.

It was a characteristic saying of Kant that we may think
certain facts while yet we do not know them. This he would
call transcendental thinking, wherein words and symbols are
assumed as concrete realities. Language is an invention and
a growth, which has not yet attained the limits of insight
and intuition; but at the same time the mind can disport with
mere conceptions which have no corroborating perceptions of
sensuous experience — although according to Kant (and Aris-
totle as well) a whole of thought must have both matter and
form — the sensuous experience being taken up into intellec-
tual forms, and so made a whole of knowledge.

But while Kant plainly instanced the transcendental ex-
travagance wherein we may verbally think what we do not
concretely know (making play upon words as real things), he
did not remark upon the converse fact that we may really
know what, for lack of the appropriate language, we cannot


62 PLURIVERSE

When the idealist, as a philosopher or observer,
finds Consciousness (a name in capitals) "positing
this world," wherein is he the wiser? Intelligence as
such can but accept what is given to it, and there


articulately think. I suspect it was as exploiting one of these
unspeakable surds, or as giving it rational interpretation, that
Hobbes claimed, if not the technical quadi'ature of the circle,
a pragmatical value "just as good."

Hobbes' proposition assumes to show the tangent that is
equivalent to any given arc, and so to determine the area of a
curvilineal figure in quadrilateral form; and in doing this he
would encounter an incapacity of mathematics to express an
obvious geometrical space. His demonstration is of exceeding
length, and of troublesome intricacy to the layman, and al-
though we have its language, the appropriate drawing or
diagram seems to be lacking from American libraries. One
can only conjecture, therefore, whether or not he made good,
or in what sense ; but such a claim is obviously an intrenchment
upon the "fourth dimension."

Let us first approve, by collating geometry and mathematics,
the converse of Kant's very pregiiant assertion that we may
think what we do not know, to wit, that we may know what
we cannot articulately think, our conceptual and formal mathe-
matics failing of terms that should respond to, or accord with
our geometrical perception, in this instance to the side of a
double squ'are.

The diagonal of any given square is equiv-
alent to the side of a square of twice its
area.

In the figure the diagonal a, of the square

6c, is a side of the double square de, for the

triangle f is half of the square be, and a

quarter of the square de, which obviously

has twice the area of the square be.

Now, mathematically, the square 6c is to

(J the square de (its double) as one is to two;

'and a side of &e is to the diagonal a

(a side of de) as one is to that which, squared, would equal

two — that is, to the square-root of two, expressed thus:-v/2.

Or similarly, if the side of the smaller square be taken !as 2

(which squared is 4) the side of the double square would be


IDEALISM 63

remains inscrutable the ingenious and productive
power which consciousness can only be said to rep-
resent. The worth of things being transferred to
consciousness affords no explanation or account of


a number which, squared, would equal 8 — it would be 'the
square-root of 8; i.e., that which squared would equal 8.

But our mathematics afford no such number as, squared,
would equal either 2 or 8. We can with decimals approximate
ever nearer and nearer to the square roots of these numbers,
but the process is in vain, because no digit, squared, produces
a cipher. Whether some other than our decimal system might
thwart the infinite regressus of these mathematical surds is
a question for professors; it is enough for our purpose here to
see in the diagram the result of a proportion which we dannot
mathematically express. We may, as a modus vivendi, for
practical purposes, wrap the problem of the infinite regressus
in a symbol (as v^), but the fact remains that the "truth" of
the matter is at the bottom of the "bottomless well" of
Democritus. Still it is reladily obvious that a controversy might
arise over the relative sufBciency of percepts and concepts of
the same object, since the diagonal of a square, taken as rep-
resentative of the double square, is as such demonstrable geo-
metrically, but inexpressible or surd mathematically.

This fact affords the hint that in other and more important
instances sensuous intuition may transcend intelligible expres-
sion. Reverting to Mr. Hobbes and his proposition, in the
absence of his diagram, I can but conjecture that he used some
such geometrical value in defiance of the professors' mathe-
matics. For he says in his fin'al comment: "I have used a
more natural, a more geometrical, and a more perspicuous
method in the search of this so difficult a problem than you
have done in your Aritlimetica Infinitorum." But I have
to think that any angular equivalent of the circle is debarred
by an inexorable proportion, which I will formulate in the
following theorem: The area of any figure is to its perimeter
as the uniformity of its extension. It is the vmiformity of
dimension diametrically that appreciates either surface or
solid. It is uniformity that constitutes what is called, more
or less in a hopeless jest, the "fourth dimension." Perhaps
we may sufSciently illustrate this fact without diagrams.


64 PLURIVERSE

them, either as to their coming or to their order or
connection. Even if consciousness were original
instead of merely a gift, its criticism but opens the
way to fundamental explanation.

However, the discomfiture of its devotees wiU not
m^ke idealism less than the most startling discovery
of the human race.


Conceive a square, six by six inches, and beside it a parallelo-
gram, seven inches by five. The two figures have an equal
perimetrical straight lineage of 24 inches, and four equivalent
right angles; yet the area of the square is 36 square inches,
■while that of the parallelogram is but 36. Some other quality
than mere extension must determine the containing capacity
of this 24 inches of lineage. Again, measure with a tapeline
any circular disc; a dinner plate will serve; then cut from
cardboard a square of the same perimeter, and impose it upon
the disc. While the corners of the square wUl extend beyond
the circle, the area of its extrusion will obviously fail to com-
pensate the lunes apparent between the circle and the sides
of the square; the discrepancy is even greater than that be-
tween the square and the p'arallelogram. In the same way,
a sphere of plastic matter, pressed into the form of a cube,
would require a more extensive receptacle to contain it.

We should learn from these experiments that form, is an
element of extensity; that excentricity of outline involves a
diminution of areal content; and that the circle, in the per-
fection of its uniformity, has a dimension which any possible
angularity must degrade and diminish.

Whether the first circle was a concept or a percept — whether
some genius thought of a point central in a horizon of points,
or a caveman twirled it with a forked stick in the sand — is
likely to remain a question.


CHAPTER in
MONISM

MONISM, popularly intending the unity of
totality, might be defined as obsession of
finite limitation — a fate of the planet-born
or orbicular intelligence. In philosophy it implies
egotism and self-relation.

As a culture it is incapable of any direct or tan-
gent thought or outlook, its expectation reverting
ever to the subjective interest and viewpoint. Com-
passing no object in it^ mere freedom to advance, it
orients its vision as if to freedom itself as a property
of its own nature, rather than the objective extensity
of the vulgar space.

Instead of recognizing everywhere as a here, it lo-
cates space behind the mental eye instead of before
it — finds the only answer to its outward quest —
a quasi other to itself, and says with Brahma, "When
me they fly I am the wings."

Its burthen is ever the "universe,*' exploited by
some theological cosmography which leaves it but a
limited object in an unlimited field. It will of course
ignore the anomaly herein cited — that of the stars
as a limited set in a limitless space that hungers for
exploration and occupancy.

A mere makeshift in metaphysics, its psychological
65


66 PLURIVERSE

plausibility renders it the most alluring recourse of
speculative thought.

For a treatise on monism one may start bravely
from the saying of Philolaus, "One is made by limit"
(plausibly a circle then, or a sphere), and forthwith
conclude that all cannot be one; for any such one,
however great, leaves a margin unoccupied; it does
not fill the canvas. Or if regarded theoretically and
rationally, rather than pictorially, or imaginatively,
such a one cannot be all, because comprehension, as
of all, must include that which comprehends, and the
observer of the fact is not yet included in its obser-
vation.

But this conclusion will be confronted by the
idealist with the undermining charge that it is a
judgment based not upon reason but upon imperti-
nent imagination. He will say that the margin by
which the one is pictorially exceeded is due to a
false pretense of space being objective, instead of
being subjective — which it certainly (or also) is;
space (in his sense) is not extension, but merely room
or mental freedom to extend; so that the one (he
assumes) can be founded centrally, or wholly within
and related to itself alone; and what imagination
regards as space and margin shall be but the free-
dom of the supreme or absolute subject ; the required
limit of its oneness shall be self-determination, and
its unity and universality shall be the perfection of
a harmonious whole. Infinity is but a false great-
ness: "that that which is should be infinite is not
permitted."

Then as to one failing of all because its observer


MONISM 67

is not included in its comprehension — assuming that
comprehension as universal must include the being
that comprehends — the charge confronts the main
ground of transcendental idealism, namely, that all
Knowledge contains or includes self-knowledge, and
that any totality is necessarily self-related, subject
and object at once. The limit of the One of Philolaus
is thus assumed as the self-determined, and the
imagined margin is resolved into the infinite liberty
of the free subject.

(It will, of course, be seen that a universe thus
established from within, with no regard to outer
space, would not hinder the existence of other uni-
verses ; and the claim of its being the universe would
be solipsism. The One of Fichte and Hegel and Har-
ris, the absolute ego, is such a centre, whose outlook
or infinite is potential in freedom.)

These are the two chief problems of philosophy : to
get the world into an absolute whole, self-compre-
hended, and to prove that knowledge is what it pre-
tends to be; i. e. that as knowledge it knows itself
as it knows other facts — comprehends its own being
as essentially its own ground. Our safety, in dread
of fate, requires the assurance proper to this infor-
mation ; and the cogitation of its possibility has been
the main industry of modern philosophy — occa-
sionally satisfied with results which have invariably
been outgrown and discarded.

The average citizen is content to believe that he is
at least so far whole and original as to be socially
responsible ; but those whom we prefer as the great
thinkers of the race have decided otherwise — not
but that man shall render unto Cassar the things


68 PLURIVERSE

which are Caesar's, but that for or against the gov-
ernment of God, "of himself he can do nothing."

The capital advantage hypothecated in monism
is that it makes a "universe," symmetrical, depend-
able and manageable, all within reasonable bounds ;
but unfortunately it implies a "universal intelli-
gence," which, if unlimited, or unfinite, could hold no
relation to personality as we conceive and represent
it. The "universal ego" of Fichte and Hegel is not
like the human ego, nor fitly suggested thereby. It is
posed as a formal, transcendental, quasi vision or
fetich, an institution, an enfolding atmosphere, coun-
tenanced as a logical necessity — a concept which,
as Kant would say, has no staminal substantiation
in a possible perception. And being sole, it must
have all its sufficiency in self-relation; there is none
to know or sustain or reflect it but itself, subject and
object at once (if ever), but for Hegel by degrees
and process which Fichte's instant insight fore-
stalled.

Against this scheme has been opposed the opinion
that a universal reason is not a reason at all, and
that universal personality is more than contradic-
tory, in fact absurd, although announced by Hegel
as "the highest, steepest thought."

In lieu of a managing personality modern thought
has conceived of necessary laws, under which what
we call "design" should appear as due to an appre-
ciation at the end or accomplishment of things,
rather than to an intention at their beginning. In
other words, that the requisite necessities of mechan-
isip are less mysterious or astounding than the con-
tradictions involved in a primary and self-related


MONISM 69

intelligence. We know secondary intelligence as an
empirical fact, but its primacy or originality would
merely double the wonder, as calling for similar
necessities to avert its logical contradictions. A
necessary machine is as plausible as a self-related
mind ; for a principle of reason can have no contra-
diction. Materialism holds that if knowledge is not
essentially grounded, is not self-related, mind-stuff
is no more explanatory than matter; that God be-
comes but a convenient limb or fetich whereon to
unburden the Mystery. The wilds of nature are as
fertile and luminous as are the Elysian fields. [We
recall the scientist who grieved that he could not
find within him the God whom he recognized every-
where without.]

I can but think that monism wiU come to be re-
garded as a needless barrier to explanation — a
mere mirage of limitation, a projection of our ego-
tism, through a false psychology of personality as
an original principle. There is no louder voice
from antiquity than that which declares that One
is made by limit ; and there can be nothing more con-
vincing to the average thinker than that any One is
transcended as but a spot on the true universal.
Let there be gods and gods in the "lower cases,"
the universe will not stand for the capital G. The
true universe is too great for a "personal" God.
The margin beyond the One (even as liberty) is
an abyss wherein the bats of chance wing blindly
in dreams of potential cataclysm and disaster.

The management and comprehension of wholeness
seem to be the main difficulties of explanation.
When we are once rid of these, which to any second


70 PLURIVERSE

thought are clearly impossible — when we frankly
admit that there must be an everywhere as plaus-
ible as any here — we are freed from the exaction
of management by impossible comprehension, and
are at liberty to look for principle, fertility, ex-
planation in the monads and centres of the Midst,
where everything for itself must be. One may then
"look into his heart and write." We may possibly
find the monads giving explanation without compre-
hension — find a vast democracy working by im-
mediate contracts and local managements of in-
dividual energy, regardless of any autocratic
heredity, or any cosmic process or purpose. Get
rid of this impossible wholeness and the impossible
"purpose of eternity," and we may find in heart and
life something so noble, so wiUful, so self-sacrificing
and magnanimous in suffering, that our most criti-
cal curiosity shall call it in itself worth while, suffi-
cient for being — in fine, pure Cause.

It may well be that this bewildering immensity,
which yet is not a whole nor demanding treatment
as a whole, has exaggerated the dignity or profund-
ity of sufficient explanation. The Mystery may be
more homely and secular than our fear and ignor-
ance have come to regard it. Perhaps "He is not
far."

What we would infer is that the notion of whole-
ness, as of a One, throws all the hope of explana-
tion into the possibility of a universal personality,
which could be one only from the inside, by solipsis.
Experience teaches us the possibility of monads,
Ones of quasi original power, which, while not fully
explanatory, still carry the Mystery as feasibly


MONISM 71

as a God may carry it; but a universal One is ob-
jectively impossible, save in a transcendental con-
cept of pure solipsism.

The conception of a continuous democratic many,
everywhere as here, vacates the contradiction of a
universal objective One, and is embarrassed only by
the familiar Mystery which aU intelligent monads
are to themselves. And this Mystery I have tenta-
tively presumed to alleviate (adopting as the canon
of pure reason the empirical "I think"), in the
self-respect of «ome great emotion or agonism that
should feel itself worth while — as when Ajax would
defy the lightning, or when Job should curse God
and die. The conjecture seems to open a vista
which, pursued with resolution, might lead toward
finite satisfaction, if not to explanation.

The miracle of originality or principle Is no more
astonishing, theoretically, in a monad than in a
god. We are personally conscious and accustomed
to a certain amount of "creation" ; and we should be
well contented in finding the world at large so ac-
counted for ; but when the difficulties of universality
cut us off from that satisfaction, the Immense aggre-
gations and consistent systems of things still get no
explanation from the energy and Intelligence of
mere monads. The stars for instance, and their
revolutions: men do their work, making cities, as
the coral Insects build great reefs, and the Instant
efficiency Is In some degree satisfactory; but even
Ignoring the One whole, or assuming It as impossible,
there are lesser wholes too great to be accounted for
by individual and unconcerted agency. There seems


72 PLURIVERSE

to be required some fitness in the elements of things,
by which mere aggregation should result in admir-
able forms and harmonious masses and movements
— possibly to be countenanced by the concession of
all-enduring time.

To faintly illustrate the intention here: Most
people have seen what are called "alum baskets"
(rock candy is of the same nature). They are
forms automatically constructed or determined upon
cottoned wire immersed in a solution of alum or
sugar. Regular cubes, usually about a quarter of
an inch in diameter, accumulate around the frame
of the structure, until each wire is loaded with
crystals, and averages about an inch and a half
in thickness — the whole capable of any fanciful
design. The philosophical spirit, curious as to
what or who produces these beautiful and wonder-
ful things, is loth to sing "the hand that made us
is divine" ; for they are not divinely worth while, at
least, a more mechanical reference would be accept-
able. What hinders the thought then, that the
planes and angles of the elemental atoms of the
solution are such that the aggregation gets its
form from the adjustment, through a uniform at-
traction, of aU the planes and angles? The wholes,
then, would thus be simplified, so far as their great-
ness is concerned, by reference to the mechanism of
the elements. A multiverse might thus be construed,
though a universe were impossible.

So in the growth of a plant. If we consider the
sap within it as rising, by the general expansion of
heat, in tubes of a valvular formation, which hold
all they get, against the cooling process of the


MONISM 73

night, and then, in the returning light and heat,
exude the sap into the similarly crystal atmosphere
at the ends of the fibres and tendril:., we may indeed
admire the grown result, but we look at it as rather
scientifically than spiritually mysterious. We see
beautiful ferns produced in this manner; and then,
on a frosty morning, we may see the nightly dew on
the pavement for mUes and miles thrown into pre-
cisely such fronds and ferns. Our science in the
premises, while it does not fully explain as yet,
abates the necessity of the superstitious personal
intention; it reduces the individual peculiarity to a
generalization; it gives the wonder of the many a
trend toward a single however mysterious principle.

Why are we so egotistic and suburban as to re-
quire for our mental environment a "universe" as
limited to unity, rather than a multiverse of cos-
mopolitan, democratic and uncentred continuity.''
The rims of the philosopher's spectacles seem to de-
termine a monism in his outlook. It would seem a
pot diiBcult viewpoint to attain, that there are no
monistic limits to the world ; that everything, great
or small, is a monad in the Midst, not of a universe
but a pluriverse of centres having no circumference
or comprehension. We regard this as the unques-
tionable fact ; its denial results in metaphysical con-
fusion. No one claims a limit to space, yet finite
sophistication keeps limiting existence to an All, or
a One, not considering how these notions antagonize
such an unlimited space. Egoism must have all
things under a central and personal control, a
mental comprehension of an admitted infinite!

Certainly the cosmos is a problem of management ;


74 f'LURIVERSE

the appearance r^ design is to be accounted for as
best it may ; but jl shall show, on positively scientific
grounds, that lii^ited matter — as in a set or system
of stars — is iylipossible under either physical or
metaphysical gravitation.

The Midst

As in Aristotle nature and becoming are by the
graduation of matter into form, or of being into
knowing, the actual is ever at a turning point, the
Midst. Our ordinary use of the word "universal"
is for the inference of greatness ; it is for telescopic
rather than microscopic extension. But as we must
see, in the demonstration of the relativity and ideal-
ity of size by the microscope, our determinations of
size are limited by material agents; our ordinary
Midst, or actuality, is contingent upon our inven-
tional progress, variously with the telescope and the
microscope.

(While our greatest telescopes still leave the fixed
stars so far that the orb and its orbit are focused
as but a motionless point, with the "infinite" still
beyond, so the best microscope still raises the ques-
tion whether in the infinitesimal direction, there is
any creature so small but another creature lives
upon it ; does the infinite divisibility of matter carry
the infinite divisibility of life and soul? On the
other hand, does the illimitability of space exclude
the possibility of personality as effacing the limits
inseparable from One? As Truth, pursuing the in-
finite divisibility of matter, dives into Democritus'
bottomless well, so, following the increasing length
of the telescope, she diminishes the probability of


MONISM 76

intelligent ?ind intelligible comprehension, and
prompts all thought to fall back upon the actuality
and practicality of the Midst as our only reality,
holding with Parmenides, "that that which is should
be infinite is not permitted." That All is One can
be true only transcendentally, as a conjecture be-
yond all experience, either material or mental.)

CiRCULAE Monism

The monism of the circle, the recoil of compensa-
tion (with the waste and weariness and inconse-
quence of the whole process) is quaintly put by
Emerson in his poem, "Uriel." He recalls ancient
and pre-historic being, before the wild time was
coined into calendar months and days, before there
were orbs or orbits then, in the empyrean of pure
thought, seemingly indifferent (in the poem) whether
Nature was in fact or as yet in contemplation. The
young gods were discussing necessary laiV^s of form
and measure, and resolving what exists and what
seems, and Uriel "gave his sentiment divine, against
the being of a line" :

Line in nature is not fotmd;
Unit and wniverse are round.
In vavn produced, all rays return;
Evil will bless, and ice zdll burn.

"The rash word boded iU to all" ; of what avail were
ambition or temporal success, if an undiscriminat-
ing time covdd avenge and retrieve it all? "The
stern old war gods shook their heads"; what mat-
tered their victories or achievements? The red
slayer but dreams that he slays. The balance-beam


76 PLURIVERSE

of fate is bent. Hell cannot hold its own. All
glides into confusion and misuse. But

Straightway a forgetting wind

Stole over the celestial kind.

And their lips the secret kept.

If in ashes the fire-seed slept;

But now and then truth-speaking things

Shamed the angels' veiling wings;

Out of the good of evil born

Came Uriel's voice of cherub scorn.

And a blush tinged the upper sky.

And the gods shook, they knew not why.

But the conjecture of an essentially centripetal or
reverting element in thought, although we should
not at all grudge it as implicating self-relation by
process, fades before a more practical consideration,
pertinent at once to metaphysic and common sense.
The law or fact of gravitation renders monism
scientifically impossible.

It is a matter of philosophical importance to de-
termine the truth or falsity of this dictum, that
"unit and universe are round"; that is, to know
whether existence is a continuous democracy or a
somewhat centered autocracy, for which space is
wholly subjective, mere room or freedom from ob-
struction. This is no idle speculation. Any edu-
cated mechanic knows that his rules are perversions
of scientific fact. He knows that his water-level is
not the true tangent, which practically would bow
up into the atmosphere, and that his plumb-lines
converge at the bottom like the sides of a bell-
crowned hat. It is of prime theological importance


MONISM 77

to know if intelligence has a centripetal or back-
looking tendency, as has the flying foot of the com-
pass, or the lost man in the woods, whose best leg
brings him back to his starting point. For as
before noticed, the fact, if such it may be, is no proof
of self-relation, save as in the process of the Hege-
lian absolute — which ends nowhere and amounts to
nothing.

We want a new or at least an additional cri-
tique of pure reason. Kant was thorough enough
to see that man's limit of penetration and explana-
tion is drawn in the plain "I think." But the liberty
of transcendental speculation opens the field to very
ambitious and pretentious thinking, and to the in-
vention of new words ; and at the same time, given
the canon of reason as his own "I think," "/ feel"
must claim a large share in the matter of thinking.
Hereby we get those exclamations of Herbart and
Jacobi, and philosophy comes down to psychology
— asking the opinion of the natural man and the
unsophisticated child, appealing to the "heart" as
well as to the mind, to sense as well as to understand-
ing, to satisfy the obsession of Cause, or Why.
Here the inarticulate divine gets utterance: Why
not the same when a man, opposed or grieved or dis-
appointed, growls of "God," or "damnation".'' He
gives the heart of reason, which has no profounder
expression. We cannot go deeper than this for
cause or explanation.

Needs there a deeper cause for the conception of
a child than is experienced in the venereal heat, born
of accidental contact and occasion? Shall we as-
cribe to primogeniture and succession the thousand


78 PLURIVERSE

seminal germs — active creatures under the micro-
scope — of which but one or two are preserved and
cherished? Why shall I doubt that my own need
of contact or material company on a dangerous emi-
nence explains, is the same as the gravitation of
matter? It is not a highbrow explanation, but it
shall serve if science can oifer none more appealing
to the something higher or deeper than science which
ScheUing declared he certainly did know. If phil-
osophy ever succeeds it may have the discomfiture
of finding its Spectacles on its nose.

This consideration makes philosophy easier, or
at least more hopeful. If we could discover some
one thought or thing — whether form or matter or
harmony or whatsoever — which, given time, could
initiate and continue the results of nature in their
variety and manyness, we would not so insist upon
a superstitious primogeniture, but would give more
credit to the mechanical impersonality of the en-
vironment. We are possibly too superstitious as to
this primogeniture. We rightly assume, in general,
that the oak comes from the acorn, and the acorn
in turn from the oak, so telescoping the whole process
out of a divine original, for which the environment
seems merely negative and receptive. But the fact
shows that this line of descent has no sacred integ-
rity; there are organic wholes whose norm is to be
credited to the environment alone, outside of the
line of sacred heredity.

For example, here is a willow tree, a beautiful
whole in aesthetic thought — root, stem and branches
appealing to designing intelligencie. We may re-
gard it as of two parts, the roots and the apparent


MONISM 79

tree — a primogenital whole. But now as a fact
of experience we may cut off a limb or a twig of
the proper tree and plant it in the ground, and
the environment wiU furnish it a root of its own,
and make it a goodly organic whole ; and if we sever
the old top from the new root, the environment will
furnish a new top from the remaining root — ful-
filling a perfect organism outside the line of heredi-
tary descent, and affording a complete break in the
primogenitive succession, and so vacating any orig-
inal intention of heredity in that instance.

A fact like this looms large in teleology, where we
have to concur with M. Bergson, that however the
positive activity appears in current life, the nega-
tive shores react and determine the course of the
stream quite as much as they are worn and deter-
mined by it. The check is as potent in the result as
is the ostensible intention, yet it gets credit for
only a brute resistance or stolidity. So that modern
philosophy, better affecting mechanism which it
assumes to understand, is using in its explanation
as little as possible of personality and metaphysics,
preferring rather to ignore intention altogether than
seek it in first principles, where it would be a mystery
stiU and at last, and also lacking the familiarity and
habitude of mechanical explanation — it being satis-
fied with science without speculating on the science
of it. And given the fulcrum of Archimedes, and
the hair trigger with which to let off M. Bergson's
explosions of stored energy, a clever thinker can
make a very plausible demonstration with matter and
mechanism. He shall need only that his leading
cornet finesse the high C.


80 PLURIVERSE

Here then I invoke Kant's canon of pure reason,
the plain "I think" of the cultivated man. This
permits the entrance of the common sense, of the
One of first principles, as well as the expert of the
Many, who in his vast and labored complications
may presume to determine such data as the paral-
laxes of fixed stars. There are certainties of sense
below the threshold of relations, and there may be
intimations of the first principle had in placing one's
hand on the heart of Nature, or one's ear close to
the ground — not as a great "reasoner" but with a
simple faith — say of Herbart or Jacobi, or of
Jesus, when he declared, "If any man will do His
will he shall know of the doctrine." For it was
thus that Plato conceived the first principle of be-
ing as the Good, the sense of value — not by an
activity or equation (as Heraclitus made being in-
evitable in the equality of being and not being dia-
lectically), and by a direct empirical appreciation
of reality.

So I find gravitation a disproof of monism; and
as no scientist assumes to account for gravitation as
either an effect or a cause, I offer my insight of it
as a heart experience, partly prompted by the an-
cient Scripture, the first afterthought of creation,
"It is not good to be alone." Even God wants
company in all the philosophies that I have read.

Gravitation, primarily, is not mere attraction to
the earth, but a general principle, the affection of
matter for its kind. A chip floating in a basin of
water will draw up the motes beneath it; it would
not float alone. Beasts and men alike want com-
pany. He who finds a prize is ill content therewith


MONISM 81

until he has found some one to share his admiration.
A man at any high elevation must have contact with
some material thing. When he has climbed the
great pyramid and found himself in the empty
heaven, on a square not wider than a bedroom, he
may kneel toward the dear earth, "the ancient
Mother, for some comfort yet." Is not this a gravi-
tation that everywhere affects the local centres and
prompts the thought of a one centre for the All,
forgetting that such an All must be limitless and not
one? Kant (inadvertantly doubtless) alluded to
"the gravitation that holds the universe together";
he did not think of the gravitation which must hold
the universe apart ; for any system or limited set of
centres held in gravitation must finally all come to-
gether.

It matters not what orbital independence, or what
complication of alien forces may obtain within a
limited set of stars ; the uniform togetherness due to
gravitation as a persistent whole would ultimately
constrict their limited plurality to a central and
motionless mass.

Under countenance of our idealism and monism
we may now revert more familiarly to our original
ground and purpose. It should be obvious that
monism, or oneism in philosophy, is a vision through
the lens of the human ego as a pattern on which
its cosmos is designed. Disrupting the umbilical
connection with his environment, no longer like a
plant locally fixed and drawing sustenance from the
earth, the man walks forth a more or less independ-
ent being, with a wiU and an intelligence of his own


82 PLURIVERSE

— practically one on his own account. And when,
condoning his parasital dependencies, he becomes a
philosopher, a critic of complete and real independ-
ence and original principle, he forthright conject-
tures the cosmos, the philosophical totality, as an
ego like himself. It must be an independent Whole
and One, a totality within its own comprehension,
and known of itself, as he of himself affects to be.
And herein was the latest triumph of his philosophy,
the metaphysical insight that a totality must be an
ego. For one is not one unless known as such,
comprising in itself the limitation by which one is
one, essentially combining as subject with the non-
ego requisite to an objective intelligence. It was
the German Fichte who first authorized this posi-
tion as a psychological "fact of consciousness."

Fichte was fully awake and sensitive to the logi-
cal contradiction of such a subject-object, while
still insisting upon it, as not only a fact but the one
fact without which philosophy is forever impossible ;
and to all objectors he had but one answer: "Ask
not for the how; be satisfied with the fact." Our
Professor Ladd, of Yale University, in his "Intro-
duction to Philosophy" still insists, with the same
trepidation and embarrassment, upon self-relation
as the "prime fact of consciousness."

With the human ego thus regarded as the neces-
sary model of the cosmos or theoretical world, we
may understand how readily the later philosophers
fell into the lines of the ancient cosmologies and
their consequent theologies. In which unity and com-
prehension were the supreme and prevailing princi-


MONISM 83

pies, while man and his destiny were the objects con-
templated in their operation.

But what seems to us the greatest mistake in
modern history, and that which is the main provoca-
tive of the present treatise, is the myopic and im-
pudent assumption, not only that man is unique in
nature, and that such a comparatively insignificant
and incidental parasite can in any comprehensive
sense represent the necessary qualities of the world,
as his own best thought must conceive it, but that
because a totality confessedly must be an ego there
must be any totality at all; or again, that the stars,
however many, must have a whole number, as so
many and no more — this, although space will not
be held to have limits, as possibly waUed in or
broken off, but must still extend, and presumptively
carry an increment of stars.

, This confusion as to number ignores the ideality
of number itself — a very frequent mistake, such as
is also the phrase "an infinite number," which cancels
the explicit discretion for which number is intended.
The slight "puzzle" which was mentioned in our
Chapter I, wherein a new star, as one more than
what are, must increase their number, and so prove
that they have a whole number, so many and no
more, will become "one more" by the addition of a
new one, will depend upon the question whether they
have already a number to be added to. Your
"more" is a relative and comparative, and must have
its much to begin with, and a definite limit which it
may exceed; and such a factual limit is the very
requirement at issue. If the stars go on and on,
as an increment and occupancy of space, all thought


84 PLURIVERSE

of wholeness is excluded, and your "number" ex-
hales as a merely subjective discrimination, or fanci-
ful conjecture of addition by one, regardless of any
sum resulting.

It is here that one needs most urgently the doc-
trine of idealism, that "consciousness posits this
world," and that diiference or distinction is mental,
and not a property of "things in themselves." Our
habits of thought have in many instances turned
things inside out, so far as explanation is concerned.
For instance, the ordinary notion of a volcano is
of a huge tube that spouts lava and ashes ; whereas
in scientific fact the volcano proper is a cancerous
hole in the earth, from which in time has been built
up the mountain itself. So the civilized man is
dreadfully weak and shameful without his clothes ;
your policeman feels most formidable in the buckram
of his official overcoat, while your real fighter feels
efficient only when he is naked.

Our most eminent thinkers seem to be still ob-
sessed by the half-savage cosmologies which make
man and his ego the centre of explanation. We can-
not easily evade or positively deny the large field
of thought in which all size is relative to organic
lenses ; there are worlds within what some kind of
sanity must still believe in as the real world. A
modern man must indeed be tainted with one of Mr.
Spencer's "insanities of idealism," to doubt that even
if the earth were stripped of all living things and
left barren and blasted as our moon appears —
man and his philosophies and his histories and reli-
gions vanished into less than thin air — the glorious
stars, among which by analogical reckoning his


MONISM 85

earth is but a speck, would still revolve as, theo-
retically at least, they have ever revolved, regardless
of all impertinent sensitiveness to time or times.

It would seem that any rational contemplation of
this scientific extensity and authentic endurance
should obliterate the small prejudice of oneness and
limitation, so obviously due to the subjective egotism
in which it matriculates.

Yet it is not on the metaphysical necessities of
the case that this essay mainly proceeds — at least
not so much as upon the scientific and empirical in-
duction that, whatever forces may be held to account
for the local revolutions of the individual stars, the
general impulse of togetherness (under which even
their minor evolutions are performed) demands and
assures an ever-external field of balance and compen-
sation which excludes the possibility of wholeness and
its limitation, lest the pluriversal Many, factually
apparent, should become a conglomerate ball.

In brief then, monism is the general egotism which
in idealism ends as pure solipsism. The worlds of
idealism are home made ; they are the microcosms of
which monism is a macrocosm constricted to unity
by its own egotistic limitation, founded, philosophi-
cally, upon faith in "self-consciousness." In monism,
ego and non-ego culminate as God and the world.

Vulgar monism founds largely on the uncultured
sentiment that there must be recognized an aU and
whole of the world that is other than the intelligent
witness of it. Philosophical monism, assured of the
metaphysical percept that comprehension and to-
tality must include the being that comprehends,
founds upon the hypothesis of self-relation as science


86 PLURIVERSE

of science, and confirms its position psychologically
by the assumption of "self-consciousness" as em-
pirical and unquestionable fact — however meri-
torious or unaccountable such fact may be.

Our position ignores (or at best condones) the
subjective ideality of space, standing by the empiri-
cal commonsense in its inference of an element in
existence that is opaque and objectively negative to
knowledge, and is operated under laws as mysterious
and as respectable as the laws prevailing over intel-
ligence itself, as we exemplify it: that we have no
science of science other than as the gift of an alien
energy of which we have no comprehension or any
such limitation as is requisite to the objective unity
either of it or of ourselves. Restrained therefore
from any other than the philosophy of fact, and con-
fined to law as we empirically find it, we accept space
as unlimited extensity; analogically carrying in it
the sidereal increment which our science has revealed,
and confirming our judgment of sideral continuity
and innumerability : from the general law of to-
getherness, which, relaxing its force only according
to the distance of its material, would ultimately
tolerate no vacant space or room for orbital motion
(by whatever cause) under any other condition than
an extensity transcending all conception of central-
ity or unity, or such wholeness or comprehension as
the word "universe" is obviously meant to infer.

To popularly establish this position — not as ul-
timate explanation — we now proceed to the con-
sideration of cause or reason itself, and thence to a
citation of the superior and most plausible judg-
ments which have disqualified that notion of self-


MONISM 87

relation, or subject-object, which has been the stam-
inal element of modern philosophy.

We are not to say that idealism and self-relation
are not good philosophy — perhaps the best — but
that philosophy at its best is not a satisfactory ex-
planation.


CHAPTER IV
CAUSE

CAUSE, the insatiable Why of human curiosity
and interest, is naturally the storm centre of
philosophy. What is meant by cause de-
pends almost wholly upon the culture of the one
who means it. The curiosity deepens as the culture
advances. The average thinker or student is con-
tent with referring any novel fact to an acknowl-
edged class. One who should hold every thing or
event to the arbitrament that he could produce it
himself would be regarded as a thorough radical;
yet such a thoroughbred would halt just where the
ripe philosopher begins, for his most anxious ques-
tion is, "Does Personality explain"? "Know thy-
self" is philosophy's most classic vocation ; and pos-
sibly her keenest quest is as to whether one really
knows himself when he thinks that he does. The
definition of cause, or indeed of anything else, may
depend upon the possibility of self-knowledge in a
science of science.

All finite or parasitic reasoning is thrust out of
rational propriety by the constant obsession of the
reasoner's own beginning, so that its most strenuous
theoretical curiosity or demand for explanation ar-
raigns the cosmos itself for a foundation or a fer-
tility beneath it, not reflecting that the notion of

88


CAUSE 89

beginning is a shadow cast by his own fate upon a
ground that is not necessarily subject to such a de-
mand, a ground that cannot be referred to previous
ground in a quest for explanation. Cosmic begin-
ning is unthinkable, owing to the lack of marginal
space and time in which to distinguish its advent:
there is no canvas for such a picture, which can
obtain only as a nominal conjecture.

Shadworth H. Hodgson, then president of the
Aristotelian Society, of London, in an address, Nov.
7, 1887, on the reorganization of philosophy, spoke
as follows:

"A cause is conceived as an absolute existent mak-
ing something else to be or to become. When the
inevitable question, 'How?' is put to one of these
absolute existents or causes, a progressus in indefi-
nitum is entered on, to cause beyond cause, which
continues until it is arbitrarily arrested by assum-
ing a First Cause, which being uncaused by any-
thing else, is conceived as 'causi suV or self-exist-
ent . . . which combines the contrary character-
istics of cause and effect in the same existent at the
same time. . . . The term First Cause is therefore
a contradiction which conceals ignorance, while at
the same time it poses as an explanation. But such
explanations are rapidly coming to be looked upon
as not explanatory. The conception of cause seems
to have been as unfruitful in science as it has been
unthinkable in philosophy."

If one could identify cause in an alien world, it
would appear as the satisfaction of interest and
curiosity as concerning the contents of experience;
but after a cause has served for perfunctory ex-


90 PLURIVERSE

planation for a thousand kinds of curiosity and in-
terest, is becomes practically objective, and the
subjective element in the situation is sublated and
obscured ; the lesson of idealism is ignored ; the fact
is forgotten that in some way, or in some sense, the
reason of things is reason. In the whole fact or
occurrence, as seen in the alien world, the reason or
the reasonableness of cause should be in the inter-
pretation of the fact to the curiosity and interest
of the subjective element of the experience: be the
fact as it may, the cause as explanation is what
contents the intelligence concerned. Objective or
factual cause therefore were absurd: only in the
contentment of intelligence can it pose as cause or
reason or explanation. Even if we knew the ground
of the fact sought to be explained, the subject
inquiring may not be included in the explanation.

Born and bred as we are to struggle for existence
in the world of wonders, compelled to be satisfied at
best with merely partial successes, habited to ignore
a myriad of miracles, and admonished by urgent ne-
cessities to suppress any ambition transcending the
claims of our finite nature — cuffed by the great
Mother, as Emerson said, and admonished to "eat
your victuals, children, and say no more of it," we
realize betimes that even our curiosity is at fault,
as to the limits and the meaning of our own dis-
content. "Pleased with a feather, tickled with a
straw," men even glory in momentary achievements
which should but emphasize their impotence and
ignorance. It is only the highest culture that at-
tains any appreciation of the mystery of being.

As for causes, we have, according to our con-


CAUSE 91

scientious thoroughness, various grades of explana-
tion ; for instance, here is an explosion of gunpowder ;
the mere scientist is content to observe, and proud
to declare, that it is due to the release of certain
gases latent in a composition of sulphur, nitre and
carbon; the savant goes deeper and brings up his
"elements," his electrons and what not ; then comes
the biologist with germs and cells and protoplasm;
then the psychologist with his nerves, reactions,
intuitions and instincts; then the metaphysician,
questioning after reality and appearance ; the ideal-
ist, determining all reality through subjective laws
of the mind. And what next? If either of these
experts shall plume himself with claims of radical
explanation, he will but classify himself in an infe-
rior culture; another expert shall warn him that
his intelligence is but secondary and does not ex-
plain — that though he had himself made all things
that are, as freely as he might write these words, his
philosophy has yet to begin.

How philosophy grew, from the obsession of ob-
jective cause and natural necessity up to the conceit
of self -relation ; how it advanced from the savage
superstition of controlling spirits in the air to ele-
mental powers, as atoms and abstractions (such as
heat and cold, love and hate) to the "nous" of
Anaxagoras, and thence to the subjective skepticism
of the sophists, in which every man was for himself
the measure of all things, and the oracle of truth
and justice; how Socrates as the chief of sophists
made mind in general rather than man the individ-
ual the spokesman of reason, and made ideas the
reality amid the illusions of sense; how the notion


92 PLURrVERSE

of principle, as prime fertility and power, mounted
to the ego, first as the active demonstrator in a
world of otherness, and then as surrepted (both the
hammer and the anvil) into itself as self-related
subject-object; how this psychological illusion of
self-knowledge struggled for recognition for nearly
a century (and has its defenders even now) ; how the
disheartened professors shouted "Back to Kant!"
how radical empiricism found matter-stuff as plaus-
ible as mind-stuff, so long as knowledge could not
be essentially grounded in a science of science; how
the post-Kantians (Schopenhauer, Hartman, Duh-
ring, Lange, Bergson, et al.) exploited and glorified
a de-personalized intelligence, and how Herr Eucken
finally earned the Nobel prize by discounting the
whole philosophical industry, and socially protest-
ing, as to these latter-day protagonists, that "they
do not exist !" — how all this came to pass makes a
"very pretty quarrel as it stands." The only literary
comment that we presently find appropriate is, that
while the full and ripe expounder of "The Problem
of Human Life," after graciously crediting all the
original experts, merely deplores the "questions yet
unanswered" and the "problems yet unsolved," and
still fails to see, or at best neglects to explain that the
one crux of all — the one solution through which
philosophy could succeed and justify its long career
— is Self -Relation, failing of which there remains for
humanity but the Mystery, and possibly the ulti-
mate surd.

The path from the nai've cognition of common
sense and "free will" up to the position from which
Schwegler announced "a certain existent unreason"


CAUSE 93

— or to that where Hodgson declares that "causal-
ity per se, has no philosophical or scientific justi-
fication," and that "search for cause has been
replaced by search for phenomenal antecedents
merely, under the recognition that realities answer-
ing to the terms 'cause' and 'causality' are impos-
sible and non-existent," — is certainly a path of
technical and scientific culture; yet the reader can-
not know too soon, nor believe too cordially, that
the mysterious glory and esoteric seclusion which
have maintained the name philosophy as a headline
of the literary program, and as well the pretensions
that have emphasized the natural bewilderment of
"the plain man," are utterly inconsequent. The
Mystery remains, as somewhat not so badly hinted
by the Philosophical Dude: "Something, you know,
that puts you in mind of something you can't think
of."

Said Eucken : "After all the weary work of many
thousand years, we are to-day in a condition of pain-
ful uncertainty, a state of hopeless fluctuation, not
merely with regard to individual questions, but also
as to the general purpose and meaning of life. . . .
The facts themselves are questioned ; doubt arises as
to whether they can readily be affirmed as facts at
all. . . . The supremacy of man is now more and
more disputed, and especially the assertion that his
place among the creatures is unique. . . . The
content of man's life is not the easy, unsought pro-
duct of a natural process of historical development

— not a necessarily proper process to or toward
something really worth while."

Again he has said: "Scarcely anything repels so


94) PLURIVERSE

much as the impertinence of representing the world
as it is as a realm of reason." "God (in Christian-
ity) has taken the burden of it upon Himself, and
thereby sanctified it . . ." but "Evil remains a
permanently insoluble mystery." . . . "An imme-
diate consequence is the difficulty, indeed, the im-
possibility of an appropriate representation in
thought and conception; every exposition remains
a mere approximation, retains a symbolic charac-
ter."

Kant says: "Our reason has this peculiar fate,
that with reference to one class of our knowledge it
is always troubled with questions which cannot be
ignored {because they spring from the very nature
of reason) and which cannot be answered because
they transcend the powers of human reason."

As in idealism we were offered the alternative of
regarding objects as either given to the mind from
without or posited by consciousness from its own
spontaneity, so, analogously, as to the question of
cause, we may have acquired a habit of expecting to
find only befpre our mental eye the ground of ex-
planation, which can perhaps be found at least as
plausibly behind it; in other words (as the philoso-
phers say), cause may be only subjectively possible,
and absurd when assumed as an object. And
straightway we perceive, upon reflection, that any
objective thing, taken as the cause of anything else,
or of itself, would more obstreperously call for cause
than docs the thing to be explained; its presence
would but double and complicate the problem; so
that the reason of things must in some sense be


CAUSE 95

reason itself as knowing itself. In other words
(again), since intelligence proper can only contem-
plate and reflect, and cannot create or produce,
cause proper (for us) shall mediate or interpret, not
between the void and the fact which it could not pro-
duce, but between the fact as given and our intelli-
gence as really such. It is not being then that de-
mands or can furnish or represent cause, for cause
objectively taken must have being on its own ac-
count. Fact is the deepest reality.

For assume that a thing has had a cause; must
the cause remain to sustain and keep it caused?
Surely not ; the cause shall have passed on and left
the thing, possibly with a momentum which now by
its presence demonstrates the sufficiency of being for
itself; and since the thing may have been eternally,
as well as may any objective or knowable cause, be-
ing as such does not call for cause, and must be
originally presumed in any consideration of the
problem of existence. Philosophy, or explanation,
must begin with the recognition of some existence,
and can succeed only as the science of that science
itself.

Fact, otherwise being (not cause), is the "first
principle" of dialectic, the original presumption
from which explanation must begin: a pre-assmnp-
tion in time, which cannot have begun, since begin-
ning were possible only in a time presumed. Cause
then can be only a witness or interpretation of fact
to present intelligence, and as a "reason" can have
only a historical ground, sufficiently announcing that
it is" — because it is; its authority in explanation
founds no deeper than the authenticity of the fact.


«.


96 PLUMVERSE

It has always been too late for philosophy to fac-
tualize beginning or "first cause."

It has been held naive or puerile, saying of any-
thing "it is because it is," or "it goes because it
is going." But consider a revolving wheel, still
whirling by reason of its "momentum" ; the belt may
be of3F, and all the men gone home: there is no ma-
terial diiference in the wheel whether moving or
motionless, yet it goes by a potentiality of mere fact
that now has no relation to any present cause or
explanation. In this case the fact is final, but it
became so : it once had causes ; but since it persists
without them, the only ground of its present being
is its fact, whose miracle exhales in the presumption
of time.

This is the first principle of dialectic philosophy,
true if being and time are necessary presumptions.
Whether anything at all is necessary is a later ques-
tion, for a newcomer in time.

Whether self-relation, in the being or the thought
of it, is possible to a finite and secondary intelli-
gence — to a parasite as commensurate with the
cosmos — is partly a question of analogy and per-
spective, which, to say the least, imposes upon us
a certain modesty and humility.

It is of prime importance to philosophical sanity,
presumed as capable of due appreciation and per-
spective, that it should have such a right estimate
of the worth and dignity of man as may forecast
the probability of his being competent to the secret
of the world. Advised upon one hand that man was
made in God's image, and on another that nothing
so becomes him as modest stillness and humility —


CAUSE 97

admonished by the divinest of his race that of himself
he can do nothing, yet prompted by the genius of
his art and poetry,

Whose pulses, mounting through the pose of Ajax,
Confront the lurid blood of the high gods
As one therewith at last,

the philosopher, who must hold by analogy, is ad-
monished to regulate his pretensions and expecta-
tions by some contrast of his finite unity with any
presumptive unity of the whole, or at least with the
greatness of so much of it as he may apprehend in
his brief career.

Measured under these lights, how pitiful indeed is
the ephemeral parasite —

Without asking, hither hurried Whence?
And, without asking Whither hurried hence.

If philosophy wUl, like the green-eyed jealousy,
still make a meat to feed upon, it should, in decency
if not in reverence, consider its trivial measures as
contrasted with merely the measurable — postponing
for the moment the unlikelihood that the hymnic
Mystery of the cosmos should be vocal to it puny
and infantile ears. Even if he could learn the tune of
it he cannot stay to enjoy it.

The authentic duration of time, with its inconse-
quent and seemingly purposeless destruction of or-
ganic and ambitious successes, and the violent dis-
ruptions of the strata which show that our planet
was once symmetrical with water levels, discourage
any conclusions or fanciful conjectures of progress
toward a scientific resolution of the mystery or fate


98 PLURIVERSE

of being as a purpose of eternity. The whole con-
ception of a development to some unthinkable result
is alien to the ineluctable concession of eternity.
We have authentic history which revered an antiq-
uity long before it, which yet witnessed Assyria
trampling down the nations and gathering their
treasure "as one gathereth eggs that were forsaken,"
and saw her in turn fall, exalting over the overthrow
of Nineveh. It saw the second rise of Babylon under
Nebuchadnezzar, and lived in the midst of its splen-
dors, and beheld them aU pass away. "Then came
down midnight." So utterly had the local habita-
tion and the name of these great cities vanished from
the memory of man that 400 years before the birth
of Christ, when Xenophon and the Ten Thousand
marched through the land after the battle of Cun-
axa, they passed the site of Nineveh and never knew
of it, and camped before the ruins of Kalah, another
of the cities of Assyria, and recalled them as of an
"ancient city called Larissa."

But we foreshorten and localize history, to make
ourselves the special pets of Providence — children
of God — the seed of Abraham or David, people of
but six or seven thousand years ago, while as literal
and secular fact we have in our institutions the
unquestionable records of civilization in France a
hundred thousand years ago. The excavations of
Nineveh and Babylon have brought to light records
which show Moses and Abraham as characters in the
modern fringe of an antiquity that worked in bronze
and silver and gold, and wrote laws and history and
"literature" with diamond-pointed tools.

And before these run the sure records of geology.


CAUSE 99

which like the stellar distances have to change the
units of measurement, using millenniums as moments,
to bring their expression within the compass of
human calculation.

Said Kant: "From something that happens as
an effect to infer a cause, is a principle of nature,
though not of speculative knowledge. There does
not remain the smallest justification of a synthetic
proposition, showing how, from something which is,
there can be a transition to something totally differ-
ent which we call cause. . . . The principle of
causality, which is valid within the field of experience
(natural law), is utterly useless, nay, even mean-
ingless, outside it."

Hegel, in his logic of "essence," drops the re-
mark, "There is no such thing as a true causality."
. . . "In the case of cause and effect, the same
matter is twice put" . . . "reciprocity is a higher
relation than causality."

It is impossible in logic that one thing should
really produce another ; at best it could be only on
reciprocal or convertible terms : that is to say, logi-
cally each is cause or necessity of the other, as
neither can be complete without the other. Cause
proved as such, and emptied of its effect, would
have ceased to objectively be.

It seems the best way to set this matter of causa-
tion right in popular apprehension to exploit the
positions and relations of Kant and Hume in re-
gard to it.

David Hume was a philosopher whose vocation
was not so much to radical explanation as to thei


100 PLURIVERSE

vacation of a popular and even a scientific preposes-
sion in regard to it — t. e., to the relation of reason
to causality as a necessity in the nature of things.
Kant was a philosopher only incidentally and by a
necessary implication : he did not pose as an expert
in fundamental explanation, nor in the enlargement
of knowledge, but rather as a critic of the form and
method of knowledge, regardless alike of the con-
tents of the objects of knowledge and of the source
of our power to know them. His metaphysics ad-
visedly cut off philosophy and psychology at both
ends of it. The power to think was by him attrib-
uted outright to "spontaneity" in the understand-
ing — cutting off all debate so far as radical
explanation was concerned — while on the other
hand he ignored whatever matter might be found as
a property of things in themselves. Between these
two ignavias he proposed to criticise the form and
method of thought, untroubled by either its origin
or its results.

In his "Transcendental Analytic" he said: "I do
not intend to burden my critical task, which con-
cerns only the forms of synthetical knowledge
a priori, with analytical processes which aim at the
explanation of our concepts. I leave a fuller treat-
ment of these to a future system of pure reason."

"Pure logic takes no account of the contents of
the knowledge of the understanding, nor of the dif-
ference of its objects. It treats of nothing but the
pure forms of thought.

"Pure logic has nothing to do with empirical
principles, and borrows nothing from psychology
(as some have supposed). Psychology has no influ-


CAUSE 101

ence whatever on the canon of the understanding;
everything in it must be completely a priori."

"The Critique of Pure Reason," in its scientific
and only valuable content, was an inconsequent
diversion, in academic rivalry with its predecessors,
charging them with a haphazard procedure, instead
of following the "sure method of a science." This
procedure he held at fault mainly in its assuming as
realities mere conceptions, mere linguistic expres-
sions (here following Bacon), which had no percep-
tive experience to corroborate them. In this
unwarranted habit there had been pretentious demon-
strations of God, and of freedom and immortality,
which properly admitted of no such proof in any
sure method of science that demands a foundation in
an experience whose matter should staminate the
logical form of thought.

This sure method of science Kant borrowed from
Aristotle, who held Nature as the graduation of mat-
ter up to form, of being up to thought. These two
items of matter and form Kant substituted with
sense and understanding. Taking human cognition
as his logical problem, he divided our mental equip-
ment as of two stems from an unknown root, one
stem, sense, having a receptive capacity to which
objects are given, the other, understanding, being
active, spontaneous, whereby objects are thought.
These two faculties were in practice united, per-
vading each other, and considerable separately only
for analytical results. Neither could be preferred
to the other as an authority on truth or reality;
they render a joint verdict, and every whole utter-
ance of thought must have both their voices. Per-


102 PLURIVERSE

cepts qi sense are blind without concepts of thought,
and without the matter of sensibility concepts are
wholly empty. The interpervasion of the two facul-
ties is so thorough and essential that in their utmost
distinction each shows a trace of the other : there is
no sense so dull but it has a scintil of intelligence, and
there is no conception so fine but it is haunted by
the shadow of "a certain existent unreason."

This unity of sense and understanding Kant seems
to have mentally likened to a stream as of water that
was ostensibly pure, yet carrying a sediment at its
veriest surface, while the grossest matter at the
bottom was not hopelessly opaque. Or he might
have regarded the joint faculties as of a pencil,
sharp at one end for punctual and explicit delinea-
tion, the other end being dull or blunt, for surfaces
and gradations.

But we may see at once that he did not contem-
plate radical explanation in the union of these so
different faculties, one wholly passive and receptive,
the other spontaneous and autonomous ; for while
we may easily understand, how to the senses objects
are "given" from without, we have still to wonder at
the origin of thought, why that also is not "given."
In spite of his disqualification of all "empirical prin-
ciples," he jumbles cause, psychology and God in
one monstrous fetich of "spontaneity."

Lost amid the barren logomachies of the past,
the weary spirit of philosophy has latterly paused
in a certain resentful self-respect, as if she had gone
too far afield, or looked too high, for a sufficient ex-
planation. A man sometimes has moments when, if


CAUSE 103

he were a divine psychologist, he might respect him-
self as original, as elemental, pure cause. When
the boy is called down for the motive of his action,
and shouts " 'Cause !" he claims the heart and truth
of being. When a man, thwarted, baffled in his most
desperate endeavor, growls through set teeth his
fervent "God damn!" he is for once a reality; he
gives assurance that out of the heart of Nature
rolled the burden of the Bible old; that the can-
ticles of love and woe came from the burning core
below ; that genius builds better than he knows.

I saw a plainsman involved with a corral of wild
horses. Like a panther he encountered a huge stal-
lion. Seizing his mane with the left hand he grasped
the nose of the beast with the right, and was borne
along, pounded from below by the knees of the crea-
ture as he reared and plunged, but the cowboy kept
his hold, and with ever-shortening breath protested,
"Die here! die here!"

The light, the vehemence that comes from beneath
the threshold of articulate thought, or the venereal
orgasm of the love that makes the world go round,
is it not heat enough for cause? Should not some-
thing come of it? When we reach these depths of
feeling do we not touch bottom? Are they not "suf-
ficient reason"?

But now Citizen Kant had not the nerve to leave
reason, oxir highest attribute and sublimest essence,
at such an anomalous outcome as this ; he had neither
the courage nor the patience to appear the subtle
agnostic genius that he reaUy was. There was no
sustaining audience for the most expert metaphysi-
cian in mental history. The Prussian bureaucracy


104 PLURIVERSE

and the Lutheran orthodoxy overshadowed his in-
dividual prestige. What then? What but a further
demonstration of his skill, by showing that there is a
counterpoising answer to all his charges against
pure reason, a "moral" answer, complacent to the
religion of his nation (which Hume made light of),
to be won out of the heart and conscience of the
people — a practical as against a theoretical judg-
ment! What then but a rank stiiltification of the
very reason that proposed it — a relief from the
agonism of intelligence for a true vision of itself,
by a cringing faith in a superstitious authority?
Thus as a benevolent hypocrite ("corrupt," as
Schopenhauer characterized him, showing that in
his revoke Kant had repressed some fifty-seven of
the most liberal pages of his work), he exploited the
sense of "duty," the subservience forced upon human
weakness by an overpowering environment, as a
"categorical imperative": "thou shalt," and "thou
canst because thou oughtst" — this although Luther
himself had well said before, "There is no logical
connection between can and ought." But our apolo-
gist would hold no controversy as to how this sense of
duty and the "ought" originated: it was there, and
there was the end.

Though there truly were such a hmniliating sense
of subserviency it should be regarded only as an
unfortunate handicap, indefensibly embarrassing ex-
planatory thought. And while urging this moral
sense of duty, obviously and undoubtedly in behalf
of the prevailing view of Christianity, he seemed
as having never heard the name of Jesus, who of
all the race was the most distinguishably first to


CAUSE 105

denj the sdf-siifficiency, the essential self-grounded-
ness by which alone knowledge, as the science of
science, would be philosophically possible. [If the
name of Jesus appears in the 800 pages of the
"Critique of Pure Reason" I have overlooked it.]

That Kant was weak, if not quite disingenuous
in his quasi conformity, appears in an inconsistency
too rank to pass for mere inadvertence in so clear
a mind. There can be duty only as to acknowledged
superiority ; but Kant's "reason," despite his fling at
it as in conflict with itself, was as spontaneous and
autonomous in his account of knowledge, the dog-
matic primate of first principles, the unconditioned
referee of all metaphysical controversy, who shoidd
impose all duties and defer to none. The supreme
may not subserve; so that his "categorical impera-
tive" can be recognized only by an intelligence either
incompetent or stultified ; it should as well determine
justice as cognition in its own case. Only his arrant
slave should feel a sense of duty; the great man's
"ought" should be divinely his own, if reason is the
true first principle.

It will appear in our notice of self-rdation that
Kant utterly disqualified the psychological illusion
of "sdf-consciousness" from which popular theology
infers its notion of "free wiU" — the same which
Kant invoked for his "thou canst because thou
oughtst." But it is relevant here to recall from
history and poetry instances of the divine "impera-
tive" and the higher law, where great spirits have
taken fate in their own hands, and assumed the
judgment of justice itsdf, and law. For the law
says wdl, "Thou shalt not kill" ; but where was law.


106 PLURIVERSE

or justice, or any exoteric imperative, when Virgin-
ius drove home the flesher's knife into the bosom of
his daughter, and the flow of her young blood re-
newed pulsation in the stagnant heart of Rome? Or
when sad Andronicus enacted the same tragedy with
his daughter Lavinia ? We recognize here the auton-
omous first principle, the dogmatic imperative of
the theoretical reason, but the "ought" that shall
subserve any alien category has sunk to insignifi-
cance. What shall impose a duty on the divine and
highest? Shall he not do as he will with his own —
even with his life?

We had an eminent literary recognition of divine
independence in an obviously second thought of Ten-
nyson, as correcting his poem "Lucretius" — not
only in the hero's taking his own life, but in his re-
sentment of any imposition of duty upon his action.
As first published the final paragraph of "Lucretius"
read as follows :

With that he drove the knife into his side.
She heard him raging, heard him fall — ran in.
Beat breast, tore hair, cried out upon herself
As having failed in duty to him — shrieked
That she but meant to win him back — fell on him.
Clasped, kissed him, wailed; he answered: "Care not

thou.
What matters? All is over. Fare thee well."

I could not resist the impulse to congratulate the
distinguished poet on this amendment, and his lord-
ship graciously responded: "In 'Lucretius,' 'What
is duty?' was the first reading; it was changed be-
cause I could not find that Lucretius had anywhere


CAUSE 107

used the word 'duty' in that sense ; but it stands now
as at first."

[An anecdote of Dr. Stirling.]

I have to recall an incident of the life of Dr.
Stirling as having philosophical interest, in that it
seems to demonstrate the psychological effect of the
habit of transcendental thought upon practical
affairs.

The learned doctor was very good to me in his
day, corresponding freely and sending me his works,
and indeed in his last book, "What Is Thought?"
over-crediting me as "the authority" upon modern
mysticism. He had achieved a considerable success
through his literary ventures, especially his "Secret
of Hegel" and his translation of Schwegler's "His-
tory of Philosophy," and it happened that he had
on his hands some £4,000 which he desired to profit-
ably invest.

Now here begins our moral. Of course the busi-
ness world has developed a general conception of
investment, which involves the agency of a profes-
sional broker — such is the conventional method, and
so far well; so he placed his £4,000 in the hands of
a broker. And conceptually a broker is a broker;
as concepts there is no difference between brokers.
But a canny Scot, even an LL.D. in metaphysics,
should have been supposed to be alert to the percep-
tual and pragmatic difference underlying the tran-
scendental concept, broker; unfortunately in this
case the broker was a rascal, who abused the con-
fidence unavoidable in his profession by misplacing
the money, undoubtedly through a collusion intended
for his own ultimate advantage.


108 PLURIVERSE

Still untaught by this too frequent experience, our
transcendental dabbler in "business" resorted to the
next conventional method of righting a wrong: he
employed a lawyer to make application to the courts.
But the concept "lawyer" is not less general than the
concept "broker." Any honest expert would have
told him that a breach of confidence is fatal, and
that he had "lost" his money ; but he persisted, still
sending good money after bad, until, in spirit at
least, he was nearly a broken man.

He sent a laborious account of the proceedings
in the trial, still arguing against the errors of even
the Court himself. I responded with encourage-
ment, not indeed for the lost cause, but as contem-
plating for him a series of lectures in America,
assuring him that our people loved a foreign celeb-
rity quite as clearly as a Briton loves a lord. At
first he seriously considered the undertaking, but I
suspect that his keenness and his discomfiture alike
were soothed to inactivity by reflections upon the
good company in which I took pains to place him
and his misfortunes. Had not Sir Walter Scott
embarrassed himself and recovered? Had not Mark
Twain retreived a fortune lost in attempting pilot-
age through currents wholly strange to him? And
as for being done out of his money, he had but to
think of our General Grant: credited with the con-
quest of the great Rebellion, given a warship in
which to junket around the globe, as the nation's
ambassador and the honored guest at every foreign
court, he returned only to show his transcendental
unfitness to the working world. He entrusted to a
rascal the use of his signature, and became involved


CAUSE 109

for ten times your £4,000, and then, with a virulent
cancer gnawing at his throat, he put the last of his
indomitable energy into a book that cancelled all his
obligations, so fraudulently imposed, and scored his
untarnished signature among the few, the immortal
names that were not born to die.

I heard no more of the lecture course, but in the
last of his letters, after a humorous protest at hav-
ing to pay extra postage on my last advice, he
woulded to God that he might again get so much con-
sideration at any price.


CHAPTER r
SELF-RELATION

WE have seen Kant, ignoring the value of
things in themselves, with equal disregard
tossing the cause of them to an irrespon-
sible and libertine spontaneity. He was but a Phaen-
arete, an accoucheur, whose vocation was to insure
the proper delivery of conceptions. But his in-
genuity and success, especially at a time when phil-
osophy had outworn its welcome in esoteric circles,
roused in more ardent spirits a curiosity, not only
as to things in themselves but as to the origin of the
principle of knowledge itself, of which Kant had so
cleverly delineated the logical form. They revived
the ancient interest in the relation of thought and
being, and in subjective cause.

The quest of these aspirants was the meaning of
absolute principle; not so specially of a supreme
principle, but of any rational principle. Thereto-
fore thought had affected objective principle, or
cause; it had looked only outward; it had no re-
source but to an Other ; and the other called for still
another indefinitely. A crisis came in the convic-
tion that principle, in the absolute, must be its own
other, in itself and for itself at once, a self-relation
— if such were possible.

110


SELF-RELATION 111

We stay our leading for a moment here to say
that self-relation is the Ultima Thule of philosophy
— a land that should be, by the legends, but which,
by the bearings of the compass, has not been charted
yet.

The reader who has been thwarted and confused
in his commendable ambition to understand German
philosophy shall be advised that the main cause of
his discomfiture was the. expert presumption of self-
relation; and the hope is here indulged that as a
consequence of this treatise he may well throw down
and disregard any work that proceeds upon its ad-
mission — either as self-consciousness, self-knowl-
edge, self-sustenance, self-cause, or any other rela-
tion to self. The fact shall appear, in citation of
the most approved of thinkers, ancient and modern,
.that there is no such possibility as a self -relation.

The leanest metaphysician who ever entertained
the conception of a whole, and the clumsiest me-
chanic who ever built a machine that would "work,"
will concur upon four necessary requisites of total-
ity: there is no other outside it; its comprehension
shall include that which comprehends ; if it is known,
or determined, or sustained, all these effects it must
produce for itself; if it has or ever had a cause it
is and was "causa sui."

The whole cannot have become, for various rea-
sons: for one, becoming is a process, and the
whole could not partly be ; for another, even as time,
to begin, assumes as already a time in which to
begin, so a concrete world as becoming requires an
ideal void, a space-world to receive it.

If self-relation were the first principle it should


112 PLURIVERSE

seem that men, who have somehow the good fortune
to live, would only voluntarily die. But so far is
this from the fact of man's condition that a cartoon-
ist might cleverly depict him as one of those gyro-
scopic toys that we have seen attached to a stove-
pipe, in which a manikin model appears as mightily
cranking the wheel above, which in fact is actuating
him. Indeed, the materialist might cartoon the
idealist as functioning in a similar delusion — seem-
ing to posit the world that sustains him, or to fur-
nish through a bellows the breath that inspires him.
Men, and not the worst of men at that, have been
so conventionalized by social necessities as to feel
that it is one's handkerchief that blows one's nose.
Why not, since nothing is something in the pro-
fessional necessity of discourse?

It will be seen in a criticism of "truth" that the
baffling obduracy of the philosophical problem lies
in the coincident necessity and impossibility of self-
relation.

Truth should be what it never is. It must be
of knowledge, and knowledge of somewhat that is;
it is not itself ostensibly that somewhat, nor a
property of it, but it guarantees a claim that some-
what (as knowledge, or copy, or statement) repre-
sents it. Now to represent the somewhat fairly,
in a copy, were very well, very practical and plaus-
ible; but "very well" will not serve; a fair copy is
admissible as such, but your "truth" is precisely
what any copy lacks of the original; for thus the
original is made no better than an imitation ; original
merit, that may be unique, is disqualified by a pre-
tended re-presentation.


SELF-RELATION 113

Truth requires that knowledge shall be equal to
reality — which it cannot be, save as identical with
it — and then there is no relation between the knower
and the known (there is no truth where there is no
knowledge) ; no truth unless the identical knows it-
self.

It is very obvious that the notion of truth grew
out of the failure, or at least the suspicion of knowl-
edge. Making many mistakes himself, and misled
by the machinations of others — waking and sleep-
ing and forgetting, all involuntarily — a man is
entitled to question his facts not only, but his in-
telligence itself. Such questioning in due time
evolved the abstraction, truth, as challenging all pre-
tensions of knowledge; and thus came philosophy,
with all its complications of being and knowing,
reality and appearance, etc.

It were a natural thought, that there is no call
to make difBculties, or to find problems or puzzles
in this simple fact of knowing, or to make criterions
and distinctions in knowing; but we find that there
are difficulties in the way of absolute definition and
distinction. Things wiU. not lie stiU and be identi-
fied. Each is for all; "nothing is fair or good
alone."

This fatality is instantly detected when the pro-
fessors set out to tell oif-hand, in a popular way, the
meanings of words. Webster's Dictionary was be-
gun in 1828, and has since been enlarged under the
vigilance and assiduity of more than fifty distin-
guished scholars, all eager, doubtless, to tell the
truth ; but the reader shall judge, from what should
be one of their capital definitions, how little care or


114 PLURIVERSE

sympathy these scholars had for the problem which
haunts our troublesome essay. We quote their defi-
nition of truth:

"Tkuth. — The quality of being true; as (a)
conformity to fact or reality ; exact accordance with
that which is, has been, or shall be."

How happy the philosopher might be if the world-
secret could be adroitly told with the dash and
abandon of this forthright deliverance !

Does conformity embrace all the possible truth
and essence of fact and reality? Has all their mat-
ter gone up into form, and left no substance to be
identified, realized and lived? Fact and reality
cover being alone; they leave out thought and rela-
tion and difference, which are not properties of
factual things, any more than are illusions and nega-
tions and nonentities. It might seem a better defi-
nition of truth to call it, not conformity, but iden-
tity with fact and reality ; but when we turn to their
definition of identity we receive a slap from Sir Wil-
liam Hamilton: "Identity is a relation between our
cognitions of things, not between things themselves."
But in any explanation, are not these cognitions to
be things of themselves, even if mere spectres ? The
fact is that philosophers as a class give truth a
sinister fling in quotation marks, as a word for the
people, and not for the elect. The reason for this
is that they find knowledge a gift that has no con-
firmation of its pretensions — especially none from
itself, its only possible critic. It tries, but fails,
to focus its faculties upon itself. In identity it
finds at best the same, and the same is another:
there needs two for sameness. And when all is said,


SELF-RELATION 116

difference has as good an identity as sameness, and
sameness has "all the difference in the world" from
difference.

Then as to truth being "accordance to that which
is, has been, or shall be," does it accord in these
vital respects, that it has been, or shall be, as
really as it is now? And what shall accord to what
is — to all that is? Unless all that is can accord
to itself in that self-relation which our authorities
shall keenly resent. And again as to "accordance
to what is, has been or shall be," we might suggest
a few things that ought to be, at least in definition
of truth. Hegel, in his definition of truth, held
frankly to the self -relation : "Science does not seek
truth: it is in truth; it is the truth."

That there is such a possibility as rational self-
relation is a notion taken from popular psychology,
assumed from empirical "self-consciousness," so
called. Plato, as I will notice, had no serious use
for this conception of the "self-moved," except as a
tentative prop for the doctrine of the immortality
of the soul; for recalling in his "Phsedrus" the same
notion (the self -moved) he cast it aside with some-
thing less than approval, saying wearily: "Enough
of the immortality of the soul!" He had probably
no conviction in regard to it ; and when the topic of
mental self-relation came specifically before him,
as where in "Charmides" he raised the question of a
"science of science," otherwise "self-consciousness,"
he made it ridiculous, as I wiU amply show. I will
show also how Kant, Hume and others have utterly
disqualified it. Before we come to that citation,
however, we must appreciate the agonism of con-


116 PLURIVERSE

troversy which self -relation, as subject-object, has
occasioned.

We must first more clearly define self-relation.
There is a wide though illusive difference between
anything regarded as moving itself and as moving
of itself — which last, as his whole context shows,
was Plato's intention. Any principle must move of
itself as excluding all outside influence ; and why the
principle, as objectively regarded, so moves, is left
by all philosophy as the secret of the divine nature
or power of the world — at least, no explanation of it
is technically proposed. But in the proposition that
it "moves itself," not only is outside assistance ex-
cluded, but the principle is actively a divinity in and
for itself.

Now as we have the ineluctable fact of the world,
to be acknowledged and accounted for as best it may,
and as reason is our only recourse, and as God and
man are the only intelligences to which we may hope-
fully resort, we have the alternative of preferring
either, or of dividing the onus of the Mystery be-
tween them — i. e., between the monads of the Many
and the supremacy of the One.

Jesus said, "As the Father hath life in himself,
so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself."
— "To them gave he power to become sons of God,
even they who believe on his name."

And here I must profess a certain indifference, so
far as explanation is concerned. There is a very
gratuitous skepticism of "miracles," as arising
among powers or creatures unwarrantably con-
demned as of course secondary and barren. With
the great miracle or mystery of the whole freely and


SELF-RELATION 117

generally acknowledged, I am so much the pluralist
as to see no fatal discrepancy in a participation of
it by the parts ; and this indeed seems ostensibly ad-
mitted in any doctrine of responsible free wills. My
philosophy balks at self-relation either as divine
or human. And German philosophy, too practical
to insist that any entity can lift itself by the straps
of its own boots, has overborne the human ego and
its determining organization, and advanced to the
presumption of a "universal" ego as subject-object
— rather an institution or an atmosphere than a
normal personality, in a purely transcendental field,
a conception of mere language and logic, as we shall
find, having no authentic ground in perceptual ex-
perience — a field which Kant had spent his best
efforts in disqualifying by "the sure method of a
science." The fatal fault of the whole dialectic in-
dustry is the obsession that besides all fact there is an
explanation, a self-relation, that shall satisfy our
finitude in the cosmos, however contradictory its
expression may appear. The extravagance, the will-
ful blindness with which post-Kantian philosophy
exalted this universal self-related ego above all em-
pirical mechanism and common sense evolved and
published expressions almost outrageous. Witness
the following sentence from Hegel's private outline
of his lectures at Nurnberg in 1808-11: "But the
Mind, according to its self-activity mthin itself in
relation to itself independent of all relation to others,
is considered in the Science of Mind proper, or
'Psychology.' "

In his practice Hegel rather avoided responsibility
for that instant and constant self-relation which a


118 PLURIVERSE

mechanic would scout, and rather, as in his "Phenom-
enology of Spirit," made the soul take up its vari-
ous attributes successively as partial phases, "un-
til finally" all difference between subject and object
is eliminated. This doing by pieces the problem
of the absorption of an entity by itself only post-
poned the whole difficulty of the original problem to
the last phase, which for its own part had no piece
but itself to work upon, and so the "finality" satis-
fied the whole inconsequent process. But Hegel
knew that the endless future will never test his
finality! We may see how clumsily, and ail-but
cavalierly, he treated self-relation in his "Logic,"
when defining "truth":

"In common life we call truth the agreement be-
tween an object and our conception of the object.
We thus presuppose an object to which our con-
ception must conform. In the philosophical sense
of the word, on the other hand, truth may be de-
scribed, in a general an done-sided way ( !) , as the
agreement of the subject matter of thought with
itself." He says elsewhere: ''Science does not seek
truth, but is in the truth, and is the truth itself."

(Kant himself had forecast a countenance for
this maladroit proceeding by a doubtless inadvertent
proposition — in "intensive quantity" — that real-
ity could fade to zero "by degrees." The practical
mind must see that the last degree, be it ever so
minute, reserves in its wholeness all the degrees of
infinite divisibility. Any perceptible degree mUst
carry a gross bulk under the metaphysical micro-
scope.)
The Johannine proem ("In the beginning was the


SELF-RELATION 119

Word," etc.), which, except the question of Pilate,
"What is truth?" Fichte valued as the text of the
Christian Scriptures having the most special philo-
sophical appeal, is indeed a most affirmative counter-
part of Aristotle's doctrine of matter and form, later
repeated in Kant's exposition of sense and under-
standing. As was Dasein to Sein (for Fichte),
thought to being, form to matter, difference to iden-
tity, so for John (as for Swedenborg) was the
Word, the logos, the manifestation and presence, to
the divine essence. All things were made, or are
such, through and by this expression; this is the
light of the world, by reason of which identity at-
tains distinction, or God, whom otherwise no man
hath seen at any time, is manifested in flesh and
spirit.

It is wonderfully suggestive of the homogeneity of
intelligence, to observe how this fine conception of
the existence of inherent or latent being, through its
manifestation in form, or knowledge, has come to
men of genius regardless of each other. Fichte gave
no credit to Aristotle's explanation of nature as
matter grading up to form; and in noticing St.
John's doctrine of all things becoming through the
Word he made no mention of Swedenborg on the
same lines, but claimed (as he doubtless believed)
that his doctrine was "now for the first time scien-
tifically set forth."

The truth is that Swedenborg's exegesis,
whether from insight or inspiration, was at once the
clearest and profoundest of them all. He explains
that hy definition things become, and that definition
is a mental act. It is by definition as the Word that


120 PLURIVERSE

things come out of latent being, into existence as
knowledge and form. It is through definition by the
Word that the One, whom none hath seen at any
time, becomes the Many of things and souls.

But our instant concern with Fichte is that per-
version of consciousness into self-relation which dis-
tinguished him as the primate of that absolute
idealism which staggered the sanity of his generation,
exhausted his own patience if not his mental force,
and humiliated his imperious spirit to the faith and
docility of the natural man.

This implicit emphasis of self-relation as science
of science began with Fichte in his "Vocation of
Man" as self-conscious :

"Thou seest, thou hearest, thou f eelest ; also thou
thinkest. Thou hast also a consciousness of thy see-
ing, hearing, feeling and thinkiijg, and thereby thou
perceivest an object. Thou couldst not perceive it
without this consciousness. Thou canst not recog-
nize an object by sight or hearing or feeling, with-
out knowing that thou seest, or hearest, or feelest it.
The immediate consciousness of thyself is therefore
the imperative condition of all other consciousness,
and thou knowest a thing only in that and so far
as thou knowest that thou knowest it ; no element can
enter the former cognition that is not contained in
the latter. Thou canst not know anything save as
knowing that thou knowest it."

This subtle and plausible appeal to unsophisti-
cated experience, whereby cognition (a miracle in it-
self) is doubled and meretriciously explained as re-
cognition, is the entering wedge of absolute idealism,
disrupting Kant's "unknown root," flippantly


SELF-RELATION 121

thrusting into the ego of common consciousness the
mystery that can be thought only as the Supreme,
and thenceforth exalting speculation from the em-
pirical ego to an ego universal — and transcendental.
But the sure method of Kant, that will not permit
this light-winged concept to rise without the em-
pirical percept of given experience (and thus to
sunder the twin stems of sense and understanding),
drags it back under the insuperable criticism of the
present tense, and arrests this arrogant self -relation
with the question whether it is indeed instantly such,
and whether this "knowing that it knows" is not
rather a quick remembering that it Jcnew. Science
and speculation cannot overbear the rational neces-
sities of a present tense. Assume as we may that the
past is gone and the future has yet to come, and that
only the present instant is real, we have to compro-
mise the static and dynamic viewpoints — to draw
upon both the past and the future, to get a foothold
for reality at all.

Our most careful metaphysicians have agreed that
for us there is no being or thinking without the
lapse, the Heraclitic flux. The present tense, which
presumptively carries all reality, is mused of as a
platform loaded with the increment of the process
of becoming and a residuum of the process of de-
parting — a platform on which the serpent truth
has ample room and verge enough to take its tail in
its mouth and do the acrobatic stunt of swallowing
itself without disappearing. But reflection, second
thought, will have all that Is sensible also divisible.
Your non-existent past and future demand, what is
between us.'' How do we have names, if we have no


122 PLURrVERSE

part in realitj? Your present, if substantial and
sensible, has its older and younger sides, and only
an ideal line or division between them can be strictly
real, in the infinite divisibility of the material. The
present, as real, is to be sought down the bottomless
well of Democritus. How then does the present
sustain itself? How does truth climb out of this
bottomless well? ... It must be by some art of
livelihood; it is the trick of the chimney-sweep, who
has neither foothold nor handhold, but climbs by
the lateral impact of his elbows and his knees.^

It should be obvious that the attempt to construe
self-relation in the instant present tense, as an essen-
tiality without lapse or passage of time, is a failure,
and that "self -consciousness," as a knowing that you
know, is an implication of memory and anticipation.
The language of the proposition stultifies it. Why,
in knowing, know that you know? Is not simple
knowing sufficiently wonderful, without invoking its
second power? or why not invoke the third power,
and say that we know that in knowing we know that
we know? This reiteration neither adds to nor ac-
counts for the simple gift of knowledge.

This is the central crux of all philosophy, and of
religion as well, that knowledge and will are second-
ary, and not essentially grounded; and although
Jesus was the first to utilize the insight for the re-
lief of human conscience, Plato had exhausted the
topic metaphysically some 400 years before Jesus
was born.

The divine Greek, in his "Charmides," treated the
problem of self-relation as it is involved in the

1 See further in our Chapter IX, on "Ancillary Unity."


SELF-RELATION 123

proposition of a science of science, or popularly,
self-consciousness. He covered it both mathemati-
cally and pragmatically. To test the vulgar illusion
of a man's knowing himself he exchanged the word
Jcnowmg for excelling — a concept of the same order,
whose percept may have a tangible quality and quan-
tity which consciousness lacks — and then argued
that anything instantly excelling itself would be at
once greater and less than itself, and so mathe-
matically impossible.

Our English Jowett, translator of Plato, empha-
sizes with a footnote this very palpable hit.

Plato then subjects the topic to his usual Socra-
tic method. Self-consciousness will infer a science
of science itself. Now every science can be taught,
and its interest will assure and benefit professors.
The physician knows and lives by the science of
healing, the cobbler by the science or art of mend-
ing; but a professor of the science would have no
call ; however knowing, he knows only that he knows,
and would be as useless as a windmill for grinding
the wind that drives it.

It is not a natural but a wholly artificial inge-
nuity that deduces self-determination from the com-
mon consciousness, which indeed thinks nothing at
aU about it. I recall that Jonathan Edwards — who
had but the natural wit where dialectic was con-
cerned — in his treatise on the "Freedom of the Will"
said he would not make so light of the discretion of
"even an Arminian" as to assume that by self-de-
termination (of the will) he meant an activity of
causing it to act (i. e., by a self-relation),
but consented that he should intend an origi-


124 PLURIVERSE

nating independent principle; for he would credit
his opponents with knowing the fling of Thomas
Hobbes, which was as follows :

"The question is not whether a man be a free
agent, that is to say, whether he can write or for-
bear, speak or be silent, according to his will; but
whether the will to write and the will to forbear come
upon him according to his will, or according to
anything else in his own power. I acknowledge this
liberty, that I can do if I will; but to say, I can
will if I will, I take to be an absurd speech. ... A
man hath freedom to do if he will, but whether he
hath freedom to will (i. e. is an original rather than
a given power) is a question which it seems neither
the bishop nor they ever thought on."

Edwards did shrewdly arraign self-relation in the
Calvinistic interest making man wholly subject to
the grace of God; but all his arguments against
human originality are equally cogent against origi-
nal principle in any case, even that of God. And
the only policy or "plan of salvation" in which
man's dependent quality was useful to free him from
the exceeding sinfulness of sin, to be borne rather by
its original author in the sole vocation of Jesus as
a divine substitute, seems to have never occurred to
him.

In attacking the problem of self-knowledge Pro-
fessor Ladd first staunches his nerve with a back-
ward glance at idealism and its doctrine that ob-
jects are determined by (or through) the subjective
organs (as lenses, or functions or what not), and
then states his general proposition thus :

"In opposition to all views like the foregoing, we


SELF-RELATION 125

desire to maintain the identity of knowledge and be-
ing-as-known. . . . What is first of all, really and
indubitably existent, is this fact of knowledge. . . .
Self-consciousness is ; it is an actual datum ; and the
very attempt to be skeptical thereupon does but
lead to confirmation by repetition of this fact of
reality. . . . It is not a conclusion drawn in the
region of mere thinking; it is rather a rational con-
viction respecting the envisaged reality which all
knowledge involves. . . . It is the inevitable pro-
duct of the attempt to represent in terms of sensa-
tion that which is known to be implicated in sense
perception, but is not to be given to thought in terms
of sensation. . . . We never envisage or otherwise
know, in its naked simplicity, this substance of the
states (self), whether physical or psychical. It can
only be said to be known as necessarily implicated to
reason, present and actually existing. . . . Neither
can it be said to be known as the result of reasoning
alone. Knowledge of the really existent follows
upon processes of analysis and synthesis which we
may feel obliged to describe as involving instinctive
inference.

"In every act of knowledge through self -conscious-
ness the subject knowing is regarded as having be-
come the object of knowledge to itself. The very
essence of 'self-consciousness' is that the subject
knowing and the object known are one and the same
being.

"We may be unable to psychologically explain
the fact of self-consciousness. We may represent
the case as though the mind could never so far catch
up with itself as not to be at least one step behind


126 PLURIVERSE

the act of self-realization in the unity of self-con-
sciousness. But neither in this nor in any other way
can we invalidate the primary fact of knowledge,
with all the conviction of being really existent which
it involves.

"We may doubt whether the being that now knows
is the same being as that which knew a moment since ;
but that the being which, as subject, knows in the
self-consciousness act, is really one and the same
with the being known, as object in the selfsame act,
is a known reality which it is impossible to doubt."

Mr. Ladd has, it wiU be seen, committed himself
to the infallibility of a controversial notion not
nearly so plausible as the Aoilgar intuition that the
sun goes around the earth, and one moreover which
the history of speculation so eminently confutes. As
for the impossibility of doubting the factual reality
of self-relation, the following citations from Kant,
Hume and others should rather show it impossible,
at least for a scholar, to believe in it. Professor
Ladd's own halting reservations signalize it as
merely a modus vivendi for philosophy, and we do
not see the necessity for that. In fact Prof. Ladd
discounts all that he says above:

"The mind in its highest and wildest flights of self-
consciousness never knows by envisaging, as it were
(?), its own simplicity of reality; or by rationally
attaching to any particular conception which it
forms of itself the unquestionable faith of intuitive
self-knowledge."

[This is to say that the transcendental concept
of a self-knowledge has no percept in experience.]

"Strictly speaking, knowledge cannot be defined."


SELF-RELATION 127

[And yet it is self-known?] "The true definition of
knowledge would be a highly complicated instance
of that which in its simplicity we seek to define."
This is the crux precisely — the ultimate surd.^

It seems hardly necessary here, in passing, to con-
fess what there really is in the conceit of self-knowl-
edge. Of course a man knows himself superficially.
He bears in memory the record and attestation of his
normal quality. His past experience culminates in
a sense of more or less definite individuality; he
knows in a general way his natural ability, his
courage, and his impulses, and he has reliable con-
viction as to what he is, and what he would be and
do in any given contingency. He knows, too, his
civil and social responsibility in the state. And he

-• From Prof. Ladd's "Secret of Personality"; "The con-
ception of what it is to be a Self, and equally the conception
of my own particular Self, is not <t matter for immediate
Knowledge, or for mental envisagement, in a single mental act.
It is formed by intellectual processes. . . . The Knowledge
which is of Self differs from the Knowledge which sense-per-
ception brings. . . . The sensuous elements of consciousness,
especially those of the most definitely localized and clearly
projected sort, are relatively suppressed. In predominating
states of self-consciousness, the sensations are of the vague
unlocalized order which are attributable to myself as a sen-
tient organism, rather than to any objective thing ... by
the influence of feeling over attention one often passes back
and forth between the objective and the subjective aspects of
the same experience." "But the sanest activities of the same
intellect compel it to conceive of the Self as having qu^alities
that cannot be ascribed to any Thing."

This making a static identity of a process, and then passing
it back and forth (fully identified) between the two factors
(subject and object) which compose it, is about the most
pitiable infatuation that any scholar has ever exemplified.
And then the smug composure of it all !


128 PLURIVERSE

may well have had moments of reflection upon his
relations to his inner as well as to his outer world;
he may have become even a professor of philosophy,
and yet have never clearly discriminated between the
philosophical requirements of an original as dis-
tinguished from a secondary and given principle.
For example, he may have never contemplated any
supposable difference between his accountability to
his fellow creatures and his standing before his
Creator, as the source of his sustenance and inspira-
tion. In a word, he may have never been concerned
in fundamental explanation. Against Prof. Ladd's
naive and over-confident dictum, let us cite the good-
natured comment of Hume :

"There are some philosophers who imagine we are
every moment intimately conscious of what we call
our *self.' For my part, when I enter most inti-
mately into what I call myself, I always stumble
upon some particular perception, heat or cold, light
or shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never
catch myself at any time without a perception, and
never can observe anything but the perception."

Said Plotinus: "We feel distinctly only what is
alien, not ourselves, not our own inmost being. It
is impossible that consciousness should be the essence
of the inner life and the source of truth; the foun-
tain-head must be a world behind consciousness.

"In order to seek for reason we must already pos-
sess reason." In a word. The Hound of Heaven is
on his own trail and what he seeks is nothing else
than a foregone conclusion. . . .

The acute discrimination of Kant invites special
attention: "Reason imposes upon us an apparent


SELF-RELATION 129

knowledge only, by representing the constant logi-
cal subject of thought as the knowledge of the real
subject in which that knowledge inheres. Of that
subject, however, we have not and cannot have the
slightest knowledge."

"In what we call soul there is a continuous flux,
and nothing permanent, except it may be (if people
will have it so) the simple I, so simple because this
representation has no contents. . . . But this I is
neither an intuition nor a concept of any object."

*'The reason why that being which thinks within
us imagines that it knows itself by means of pure
categories, and especially by that which expresses
absolute unity under each head, is . . .it does not
Jcnou! itself through the categories, but knows the
categories only. It appears self -evidently that I
cannot know as an object that which is presupposed
in order to enable me to know an object, and that
the determining self (thought) differs from the self
that is to be determined, as knowledge from its ob-
ject. Nevertheless nothing is more natural, or at
least more tempting, than the illusion which makes
us look upon the unity in the synthesis of thoughts
as a perceived unity in the subject of the thoughts.
One might call it the surreptitious admission of a
hypostatized consciousness."

"What I maintain is, that all the difficulties which
we imagine to exist in these questions, and with
which, as dogmatical objections, people wish to give
themselves an air of deeper insight than the common
understanding can claim, rests on a mere illusion,
which leads us to hypostatize what exists in thought
only as a real object outside the thinking subject."


130 PLURIVERSE

(The reader should forecast from this notion of
hypostatizing a thing outside itself — like Fichte's
"being out of its being" — the struggles for causa
aui, and the Heraclitic and Hegelian claims of some-
thing from nothing, the inevitable, etc.)

"Such a concept is necessary for practical pur-
poses, and sufficient, but we can never pride our-
selves on it as helping to expand our knowledge of
ourself by means of pure reason. . . that concept
is only constantly turning around itself in a circle,
and does not help us with respect to any question
which aims at synthetical knowledge."

"I put my concept and its unity in the place of
the qualities that belong to me as an object, and
thus really take for granted what was wished to be
known."

"The internal sense by means of which the mind
perceives itself or its internal state does not give an
intuition of the soul itself, as an object." "Besides
this logical meaning of the 'I' we have no knowledge
of the subject in itself, which forms the substratum
and foundation of it (consciousness) and of all our
thoughts ... it signifies a substance in idea only,
and not in reality."

"The subjective I can never be divided and distrib-
uted; and it is this I which we presuppose in every
thought."

"Although the whole of a thought may be divided
and distributed under many objects, the subjective
I can never be divided and distributed; and it is
this I which we presuppose in every thought . . .
but that concept, or that proposition, teaches us
nothing at all with reference to myself, as an ob-


SELF-RELATION, 131

ject of experience, because the concept of substance
itself is used as a function of synthesis only, zvithout
any intuition to rest on, and therefore without any
object — valid with reference to the condition of our
knowledge but not with reference to any object
of it."

By this I, or he, or it (the thing) which thinks,
nothing is represented beyond a transcendental sub-
ject of thought = a;, which is known only through
the thoughts (remembered?) that are its predicates,
and of which, apart from them, we can never have
the slightest concept — so that we are really turn-
ing round it in a perpetual circle, having already to
use its representation, before we can have any judg-
ment about ^t."

"Though the I exists in all thoughts, not the
slightest intuition is connected with that representa-
tion by which it might be distinguished from other
objects of intuition. . . , The internal sensuous
intuition of our mind (as an object of consciousness)
which is represented as determined by the succession
of different states in time, is not a real self, as it
exists by itself, or what is called the transcendental
subject, but a phenomenon only, given to the sens-
ibility of this to us unknown being."

"The non-sensuous cause of these representatioils
is entirely unknown to us, and we can never perceive
it as an object."

"The whole representation is nothing but the idea
of a possible experience."

Schwegler subsumes the whole matter thus: "In
the traditional psychology the soul was regarded as
a psychical thing, a simple substance — an intel-


132 PLURIVERSE

lectual, numerically identical substance with the pred-
icate of personality. All these statements are sub-
reptitious, petitiones principii, derived from the
simple 'I think' which is neither perception nor no-
tion, but a mere consciousness, an act of the mind.
This act of thought is falsely converted into a thing ;
for the existence of the ego as subject, the existence
of the ego as object, as soul, is substituted. That the
ego might be treated as an object and apply cate-
gories in its regard, it would have required to have
been empirically given in a perception, which is im-
possible." (No one ever saw such a thing, or dreamed
of such an experience.) "There is no rational psy-
chology which might procure us an additional knowl-
edge of ourselves, but only a discipline which sets
insurmountable bounds to speculative reason in this
field. We may view this discipline, too, as admon-
ishing us to confess the refusal of reason perfectly
to satisfy the curious in reference to questions that
transcend this life."

In contrast with these clean-cut sentences, which
appeal to the plainest common sense, the reader shall
have a specimen of the mental contortion which, as-
suming that philosophy must of course succeed, has
exploited the opposite position: he shall see how
haltingly the explorer sets his feet upon the quaking
ground. Observe first the hopeless entanglement of
the dialectic in this concession of the preface to
«'The Secret of Hegel":

"There is no concrete which consists not of two
antagonistic characters, where, at the same time,
strangely somehow, the one is not only through the
other, but actually is the other."


SELF-RELATION 133

In his last book, entitled "What Is Thought?"
Dr. Stirling has this, of self -relation :

"I as I is the subject, and Me as Me is the object ;
but both are identically the same. This is the
primitive relation — the unit of what is, the unit of
what it is to think, and the unit of what it is to be."

To countenance this doctrine he quotes as follows
from his "Secret of Hegel": (The reader may
safely skip the entire quotation.)

"The idea is Thought, self -identical Thinking;
self-identical because in its own nature the Idea is
two-sided — an objective side is, as it were, exposed
and offered to a subjective side, and the result is
the return, so to speak, of the Idea from its other,
which is the objective side, into its self or subjective
side, as satisfied, gratified, and contented knowl-
edge."

"Cogito ergo sum. That is. Thought is; it has
come to be, it simply is — as yet, however, only in
itself: there is as yet only blank self-identity — it
can only say is, rather than am, of itself, or to it-
self."

"This is just a description in abstracto of self-
consciousness. The Ego is first unal simplicity —
that is unal or simple negativity; but just, as it
were, for this very reason (that is, to know itself and
be no longer negative, or because it finds itself in a
state of negativity) it becomes self-separated into
duality — it becomes a duplication, a duad, the units
of which confront each other, in the forms of Ego-
subject and Ego-object; and then, again, this very
self-separation, this very self -duplication, becomes its
own negation — the negation of the duality, inas-


134. PLURIVERSE

much as its confronting units are seen to be identical,
and the antithesis is reduced, the antagonism vanishes.
Thisprocessofself-consciousness has just to be trans-
ferred to the AH, the Absolute, the Substance, to
enable us to form a conception of unal negativity
of Spirit passing into the alienation of external na-
ture, finally to return reconciled, harmonious, and
free into its own self,"

Opposing this we quote a few sentences from
Bradley's "Appearance and Reality":

"It is not only possible but most probable that
in every man there are elements in the internal felt
core which are never made objects, and which prac-
tically cannot be." "Metaphysics pays no regard
to the origin of our ideas." (In a logical conflict
you may use vacumns for balls. In all efforts at
self-knowledge the subject stiU is such, still retains
the observant and superior side, and cannot for-
feit it.) "It is not known, and never as a whole can
be known, in such a sense that knowledge would be
the same as experience or reality." "There can be
really no such science as a theory of cognition."
"Every soul has existed as a not-self." "The self is
one of the results gained by transcending the first
imperfect form of experience." "A complete state
of existence as a whole is at any one moment utterly
impossible."

"There is no self-consciousness in which the ob-
ject is the same as the subject, none in which what
is perceived exhausts the whole self. In self-con-
sciousness a part or element, or again a general
aspect or character, becomes distinct from the whole
mass, and stands over against the felt background.


SELF-RELATION 135

But the background is never exhausted by this ob-
ject, and it never could be so. An experiment should
convince any man that in self-consciousness what he
feels cannot wholly come before him. It can be
exhausted, if at all, only by a long series of observa-
tions; and the summed result of these observations
cannot be experienced as a fact. Such a result
cannot be verified as quite true at any particular
given moment. ... If self-consciousness is ap-
pealed to, it is evident that at any moment I am more
than the self which I can think of. . . . In think-
ing, the subject that thinks is more than thought."
"In practice, thought always is found with, and ap-
pears to demand, an Other." "The emotion we
attend to is, taken strictly, never precisely the
same as the emotion which we feel ... it has be-
come a factor in a new felt totality- . . . Our
experience is always from time to time a unity which,
as such, is destroyed in becoming an object. . . .
The Other which it asserts is found on inquiry to
be no other. . . . If I attempt to elaborate this
point I should perhaps obscure it."

"Truth made adequate to reality would have be-
come something else, for us unattainable." (A rela-
tion must have terms, which it relates, or connects,
as by a line between them. What are the terms of
a self -relation? If a thing knows itself it is known
by itself ; the terms are identical, or else doubled in
defiance of the unity assumed.)

"To say of any temporal process whatever that
it is in the end self-intelligible, ife, so far as I can
perceive, a mistake. There is a difference unremoved
between the subject and the predicate which shows a


136 PLURIVERSE

failure in thought" (surd?) "but which, if removed,
would wholly destroy the special essence of think-
ing." "There is no idea which as such contains its
own existence." "A relation which can get on some-
how without (different) terms, and with no difference
beyond the mere ends of a line of connection, is
really a phrase without meaning." "Self -relation
has a double character as both supporting and
being made by the relation. It is a false abstrac-
tion, a thing that loudly contradicts itself."
"Without entering into psychological refinements
and difficulties we may be sure of this main result:
The actual subject is never, in any state of mind,
brought before itself as an object. . . . The ac-
tual subject never feels that it is out there in its
object, that there is nothing more left within, and
that the difference has disappeared."

"I stand on this: Present your doctrine (what-
ever it is) in a form which will bear criticism, and
enable me to understand this confused mass of facts ;
do this and I will follow you, and I will worship the
source of such a true revelation; but I will not ac-
cept nonsense for reality though it be vouched for
by a miracle, or proceed from the mouth of a psy-
chological monster."

Late as it is, I muse that the consciousness of
Hegel has never been reflected; at least I have not
recognized it in literature. As not only a teacher
but the highest authority in a quasi State-:phil-
osophy, it was not his cue to emphasize the Socratic
concession, "We do not know"; the right German
retort would have relegated the whole profession to


SELF-RELATION 137

innocudus desuetude, since one man's ignorance can
hardly be more relevant than another's. But the
problem is ever pressing, and by dexterously alter-
nating the static and dynamic viewpoints — one the
eleatic Sufficient Intelligence, in which all things
always are, and the other the process and novelty
of Nature, which it were suicidal to deny — he knew
that only a superhuman detective could impeach his
profession. The philosophical position is unique.
Let one boldly declare, and who shall ask him to
explain? or to explain what? for, this is the problem
of the world : to know by self -relation the nature of
knowledge itself — the curiosity that would turn
upon and envisage itself (which "of itself can do
nothing") .

Well assured of the futility of Fichte's endeavor
to embrace ego and non-ego in an immediate self-
related unit, and for his own part so far compromis-
ing the regime of self-knowing as to assume the man
gradually analysing his composite faculties one at
a time (still postponing the real problem to a last
•with which futurity could never confront him), he!
determined the Absolute as the process of the in-
itself to for-itself, and disingenuously allowed the
practical process of Nature to countenance a mere-
tricious violence to logical pure reason.

But this was only one of the "moments" of his
strenuous and prodigious versatility, which doubt-
less realized the utmost agonism of mortal specula-
tion. Thought long ago transcended the dilemma,
"to be or not to be," and proffered the duplexity of
being and not-being at once — not consecutively, but
jointly and essentially. If there is no self-relation


138 PLURIVERSE

of Something, the key to sufficiency is either nowhere
or else in Nothing as logically construed.

As another instance of the delusive presumption
of self-relation I will recall an elaborate attempt of
Stephen Pearl Andrews to reorganize philosophy
under the ambitious title of "Universology" — a book
of 764) pages, published by Dion Thomas (New
York, 1872).

I shall not offer any sketch of his endeavor, except
as explaining that he subsumed all explanation un-
der the three categories, Unism, Duism, and Trinism.
It will serve our immediate purpose to indicate the
necessity that, as a universologist, he had to assume
a transcendental viewpoint — i, e. to oversee the
universe; so that he naturally fell into the method
of assuming a "wholeness aspect" and a "partness
aspect" of being. Taking occasion to remind him
that an aspect presupposed an observer, I addressed
to him the unsophisticated but surely pertinent ques-
tion, "To whom is the wholeness aspect of being?"
He answered :

"Your question seems to read: *To whom is "the
wholeness aspect of being" '?

"I confess that your question is as blind to me as
Trinism, or all beyond Unism and Duism, is to you.
The wholeness aspect of being is the antithet or
counterpart of the partness aspect, of the same be-
ing, of whatsoever being, and to . any beholder or
contemplator. It is the Unism contrasted with the
Duism — the two combined being the Trinism.
But there is no good in letter-writing. Come and
see me and I will tell you all about it. N. E. corner


SELF-RELATION 139

54th Street and Fifth Avenue, up two flights — a
houseful of splendid fellows, male and female, the
incipient Pantarchy."

To sum up : Starting from the naive position that
the being that knows, in what is called "self-con-
sciousness," is the same being that is known (i. e,
that the subject and the object, by whatever au-
thority separately named, are instantly and iden-
tically one — miraculously, as held by Fichte, with-
out help or compromise from the "process" of Hegel,
wherein the in-itself becomes for-itself by being
taken up piecemeal, and so avoiding the charge of
absolute and immediate self -relation) , we have la-
boriously arrayed against that merely popular and
psychological notion the profounder insights of
Plato, Jesus, Swedenborg, Plotinus, Berkeley, Hume,
Kant, Schwegler, Jowett, Bradley, Hodgson, Emer-
son, and Eucken.

At the same time we have had to endure the weak
defection of Kant, in view of his orthodox popular-
ity, by assuming as a categorical imperative the
uncultured consciousness of "the plain man," so
stultifying all his metaphysical excellence and in-
dustry.

It behooves us to see more clearly the proper use
and philosophical importance of the doctrine for or
against the claim of self-relation. Is the want of it
fatal to philosophy? With this granted woidd the
problem be solved? Many presumptive experts have
claimed in the notion of Hegel the plausibility of
self-relation by the process of In-itself to for-itself
as "finally" self-knowledge. Notwithstanding all
the admonitions that self-knowledge is but a whim


140 PLURIVERSE

of words, is but a transcendental concept which no
perception ever corroborated ; that no man ever saw
a self or a soul; that the subject would forfeit its
whole supremacy in becoming an object and cease
being a subject at all; that the gun cannot shoot
into its own muzzle; that "truth" is precisely what
every representation or pretence of knowledge with-
out identity must lack, etc. and etc. — the claim
still seems to hold that in a man's taking himself
or his faculties up piecemeal, or by degrees, he
should exhaust his entire contents, and leave no
such wonderful "secret" undiscovered. For ex-
ample, he would visualize his courage, or his
conscience, or his memory. None of these, as ab-
stracted from his subjective totality and made an
dbject, should very seriously cripple his critical
judgment, so what recondite element of his "self"
should escape the inventory? Have you not seen
"the nation" if you have seen all the people? do not
the parts comprise the entire contents of a whole?
What IS the crux, the mystery, which our long
catalogue of authorities grudges to the claim of
"self -relation"? Or, allowing the claim, as it is
endorsed by the popular psychology, does philoso-
phy succeed as explanation? In brief, why do we
cite these authorities against the very natural
notion that personality explains, and that the world
in itself becomes rational in and only in the presence
of God? The grudge of science as against the pre-
tence of self-relation is that our highest claim and
achievement namely, knowledge, is therein made to
countenance with its full authority and significance
a claim to have attained the comprehension and


SELF-RELATION 141

mastery of that which halts our curiosity, controls
our interest, and occasions our discontent, while in
fact it does not fundamentally understand the least
and simplest thing in the world. Our consciousness,
even as it glows, is a helpless projection from an
alien energy, bottomless in its own regard, utterly
unqualified to declare or to determine anything as
necessary, and therefore wholly incompetent to radi-
cal explanation.

It is its insult to rational principle and real power
that condemns self-relation, for those who question
reality as dependent upon conventional terms. And
as mere seli-knowledge it is still hopeless of being
and of power, all-requisite to the pose of the uni-
versal — the Supreme.

Supplementary Note on the "Speculative
Philosophy" of W. T. Harris.

Speculative knowledge, or knowing, is for its pro-
fessors a grade beyond the transcendental, and
would be inadmissible by Kant, as being what he
would call transcendent, or beyond the mental pur-
view — in fact out of the world. Transcendental-
ism uses the pure forms of the mind, indifferent as
to their contents (i. e. it is concerned with pure
thinking, regardless of what it is about) ; and to
pure formality only contradiction can be fatal.
Although the topic of its thought has no element of
perceptual experience, and is of concepts wholly,
the transcendental must still have consistent forms,
capable of logical expression. Borne on the current
of pure logic, it may think what it shaU. not really


142 PLURIVERSE

know, as lacking the perceptual and corroborating
ground of experience.

(I have before instanced the converse of this last
position, in the fact that we may know what we
cannot think — as appears in the failure of math-
ematics to articulate in its digits the side of the
double square, or of ^2 or \/8-)

But the speculative will not be withheld from truth
by the impossibility of its appearance in either imag-
inable or logically conceptual form, nor wiU it
allow truth to be discredited by its practically neces-
sary appearance in the form of contradiction. Its
claim is to "the unpicturable notions of intelligence";
and these notions are not amenable to immediate
or direct knowing, but are to be achieved by method
and system, in a mediate or roundabout process,
which must defer the student's conclusion until he
has learned to think properly.

And this delay is in any event advisable ; for there
are various cases in which immediate conclusion and
forthright expression may result in utter confu-
sion. Truth is largely amenable to its viewpoint;
and there appear various overt contradictions in
the countenance of half-truths used as whole ones,
affording expression in contradictions which neces-
sitate no antagonism in reality.

Two observers, of but partial experience, may
truthfully declare, one that a given shield is con-
cave, the other that it is convex; the result, as a
matter of evidence, can be assured only methodically,
by a duodiction, or a uniting of the two assertions.
An honest man may swear that the sun goes around
the earth; an astronomer may swear, by the light


SELF-RELATION 14.3

of his science, that the earth goes around the sun;
the truth of the matter, if it is a single or toto-
truth, is determinable only upon considerations which
neither of the two witnesses can have ever exploited
— to wit, whether the "universe" is one or many, or
both, or Wither. And the two assertions, although
different, are not contradictory. Neither says that
the other is not true.

From the speculative viewpoint the ultimate truth
is a methodical deduction, to be entertained only
under a trained and scientific vision, which can con-
clude esoterically in spite of, and without the assist-
ance of either language or imagination, both of
which, though necessarily to be used in declaring
the speculative insight, are used under protest, as
handicapping the true meaning. At least its advo-
cates will not balk at the assertion that all reality is
the cause of Itself.

The Journal of Speculative Philosophy, edited and
published by William T. Harris, superintendent of
the schools of St. Louis, first appeared in 1867, and
continued quarterly until 1899, when Mr. Harris
was appointed by President McKinley as U. S. Com-
missioner of Education. The initial and constant
inspiration of the magazine was "causa sui," or self-
determination, as the philosophical first principle of
thought and being, and the only fundamental basis
of explanation. With the first number the editor
began an elaborate "Introduction to Philosophy,"
which was rather, as is usual in such cases, an intro-
duction to the reader of what philosophy the author
knew. All such Introductions are but reveries as to
what the problem really is — or how to state it.


144 PLURI VERSE

This "Introduction's" chief appeal to the reader
was the alleged inconsequence of objective or his-
torical cause as preceding effect — a first cause as
originating all effects in a succession of dependent
beings — while no dependent being could have any
causality to spare — whence first cause (whether
first in history or in the order of reason) must be
independent, having all causality in, for and of it-
self.

This very cheap and very peremptory assertion
seems to ignore the cloture imminent in the previous
question, whether there is or must be any cause at
all — or who shall determine the sufBciency of any-
thing alleged as a cause — and whether in fact a
cause is objective or subjective. One does not need
much logic to perceive that even the admission of the
claim (that self-cause is the only possible cause)
gives cause no standing as yet in any court.

Now Doctor Harris knew as well as any other
man (and far better than most men) the logical
impossibility of self-relation as we have sufficiently
exposed it ; but encouraged by the vulgar psychology
of "self-consciousness," and by the propriety of cer-
tain systematic conclusions which outface immediate
knowledge although handicapped by contradiction,
he called in the assistance of an inadvertent remark
of Kant that space is "an infinite quantity" —
whence, since quantity founds upon quality, space
could be regarded as objective. And now, before
citing the use that Prof. Harris made of this inadver-
tence of Kant, it is highly important that we have a
correct definition of space, even as Kant himself
more carefully defined it.


SELF-RELATION 146

Space is purely ideal — that is to say, vernacu-
larly, it is nothing save as it is made a topic by
thinking of it. Space is a contemplation, a sub-
jective concession or informal judgment, implying
absolute freedom, room or opportunity for any men-
tal project of either adventure or conjecture — i. e.
there is in space no hindrance or objection to any
proposition. Space does not in itself imply exten-
sity, but means liberty to extend.

Space taken objectively, as a quantity, would in-
fer a field of thought which its proprietor might
sublet by the yard or the acre, and guarantee it
from trespass or interference — there being just so
much of it on record and no more. On the contrary
the occupancy of space is infinitely heterogeneous
and doubled up. Taken as mere extension, there is
double space here in the street, where the mirror on
the wall shows my room projected several feet over
the pavement, including color and form as real as
such can be. In the room itself are heat and light
in the same space ; there is appreciation and specu-
lation, and there is certainly room for improvement.

Kant's scientific definition of space is as follows :

"Space, as prior to all things which determine it
(fiU or limit it) is nothing but the mere possibility/
of external phenomena, so far as they exist already,
or can be added to phenomena given."

This argues something very different from "an
infinite quantity."

Now returning to Harris's different kinds of
knowing, the reader may grudge the space required
here, but he should know the quality of what for
twenty years passed as the best thought of America,


146 PLURIVERSE

and was carefully reflected in various European
publications.

[From Harris's "Introduction to Philosophy":]

"It is a mistake, to attempt to introduce the be-
ginner of philosophy at once into the dialectic.
The content of philosophy must be first presented
under its sensuous and reflective forms, and a grad-
ual progress established. In this chapter an at-
tempt wiU be made to approach again the ultimate
principle which we have hitherto fixed only in a
general manner as Mind. We will use the method of
external reflection, and demonstrate three proposi-
tions: 1. There is an independent being; 2. That
being is self-determined ; 3. Self-determined being is
in the form of personality, ». e. is an ego.

"1. — a. Dependent being, implying its comple-
ment upon which it depends, cannot be explained
through itself, but through that upon which it de-
pends.

"b. This being upon which it depends cannot be
also a dependent being, for the dependent being has
no support of its own to lend to another ; all that it
has is harrowed. A chain of dependent beings col-
lapses into one dependent being. Dependence is
not converted into independence by mere multipli-
cation,

"c. The dependent, therefore, depends upon the
independent and has its explanation in it. Since all
being is of one kind or the other, it follows that all
being is independent, or a complemental element of
it. Reciprocal dependence makes an independent
including whole, which is the negative wnity.

"Definition, — One of the most important imple-


SELF-RELATION 147

ments of the thinker is the comprehension of "nega-
tive unity." It is a unity resulting from the
reciprocal cancelling of elements ; e, g., salt is the
negative unity of acid &nA alkali. It is called nega-
tive because it negates the independence of the ele-
ments within it. In the negative unity water, the
elements oxygen and hydrogen have their indepen-
dence negated.

"2 — a. The independent being cannot exist with-
out determinations. Without these, it could not dis-
tinguish itself or be distingmshed from nought.

"b. Nor can the independent being be determined
(i. e. limited or modified in any way) from without,
or through another. For aU that is determined
through another is a dependent somewhat.

"c. Hence the independent being can be only a
self-determined. If self-determined, it can exist
through itself.

"3. — a. Self-determination implies that the con-
stitution or nature be self-originated. There is
nothing about a self-determined that is created by
anything without.

"fe. Thus self-determined being exists dually — it
is (a) as determining, and (b) as determined, (a)
As determining, it is the active, which contains
merely the possibility of determinations; (b) as de-
termined, it is the passive result — the matter upon
which the subject acts.

**c. But since both are the same l^eing, each side
returns into itself: (a) as determining or active, it
acts only upon its own determining, and (b) as pas-
sive or determined, it is, as result of the former, the
selfsame active itself. Hence its movement is a


148 PLURIVERSE

movement of self-recognition — a posting of distinc-
tion which is cancelled in the same act. (In self-
recognition something is made an object, and identi-
fied with the subject in the same act.) Moreover,
the determiner, on account of its pure generality
(i. e. its having no concrete determinations as yet),
can only be ideal — can only exist as the ego exists,
in thought ; not as a thing, but as a generic entity.
The passive side can exist only as the self exists in
consciousness — as that which is in opposition and
yet in identity at the same time. No finite existence
could endure this contradiction, for all such must
possess a nature or constitution which is self-deter-
mined ; if not, each finite could negate all its proper-
ties and qualities, and yet remain itself — just as the
person does when he makes abstraction of all, in
thinking of the ego or pure self.

"Thus we find again our former conclusion: —
All finite or dependent things must originate in and
depend upon independent or absolute being, which
must be an ego. The ego has the form of infinitude
(see Chap. 2 — "The Infinite is its own Other").

"We hope to see those necessities of thought which
underlie all philosophical systems.

"Many of the 'impossibilities' of thought are
easily shown to rest upon ignorance of psychological
appliances. The person is not able because he does
not know how — just as in other things. We must
take care that we do not confound the incapacity of
ignorance with the necessity of thought.

"Among the first distinctions to be learned by the
student in philosophy is that between the imaginative
form of thinking and pure thinking. The former is


SELF-RELATION 149

a sensuous grade of thinking which uses images,
while the latter is a more developed stage, and is
able to think objects in and for themselves («. e., as
'unpicturable').

"At first one might suppose that when finite things
are the subject of thought, it would make little dif-
ference whether the first or second form of thinking
is employed. This is, however, a great error. The
Philosopher must always 'think things under the
form of eternity' if he would think the truth.

"Imagination pictures objects. It represents to
itself only the bounded. If it tries to realize the
conception of infinitude, it represents a limited some-
what, and then Reflection or the Understanding (a
form of thought lying between Imagination and
Reason) passes beyond the limits and annuls them.
This process may be continued indefinitely, or until
Reason (or pure thinking) comes in and solves the
dilemma. Thus we have a dialogue resultant some-
what as follows :

"Imagination: Come and see the Infinite, just as
I have pictured it.

"Understanding (peeping cautiously about it) :
Where is your frame? Ah! I see it now clearly.
How is this? Your frame does not include all.
There is a 'beyond' to your picture. I cannot tell
whether you intend the inside or outside for your
picture of the Infinite ; I see it on both.

"Imagination (tries to extend the frame, but with
the same result as before) : I believe you are right.
I am well nigh exhausted by my efforts to include
the unlimited.

"Understanding: Ah! you see, the Infinite is


150 PLURIVERSE

merely the negative of the finite or positive. It is
the negative of those conditions which you place
there in order to have any representation at aU.

"While Understanding proceeds to deliver a course
of wise saws and moral reflections on the inability
of the Finite to grasp the Infinite, sitting apart upon
its bipod — for tripod it has none, one of the legs
being broken — it self-complacently and oracularly
admonishes the human mind to cultivate humility.
Imagination drops her brush and pencil in confusion
at these words. Very opportunely Reason steps in
and takes an impartial survey of the scene.)

"Reason: Did you say that the Infinite is un-
knowable?

"Understanding: Yes; To think is to limit, and
hence to think the Infinite is to limit it, and thus to
destroy it.

"Reason: Apply your remarks to space. Is not
space infinite?

^'Understanding : If I attempt to realize space I
conceive a bounded, but I at once perceive that I
have placed my limits within Space, and hence my
realization is inadequate. The Infinite, therefore,
seems to be a beyond to my clear conception.

"Reason: Indeed! When you reflect on Space,
do you not perceive that it Is of such a nature that
it can be limited only by itself? Do not all its limits
imply Space to exist in?

"Understanding : Yes, that is the difficulty.

"Reason: I do not see the 'difficulty.' If Space
can be limited only by itself, its limit continues it
instead of bounding it. Hence it is universally con-
tinuous or infinite.


SELF-RELATION 151

"Understanding: But a mere negative.

''Reason : No, not a mere negative, but the nega-
tive of all negation, and hence truly affirmative. It
is the exhibition of the utter impossibility of any
negative to it. All attempts to limit it, continue
it. It is its own other. Its negative is itself.
Here, then, we have a truly affirmative infinite in
contradistinction to the negative infinite — the 'infi-
nite progress' that you and Imagination were en-
gaged upon when I came in.

"Understanding: What you say seems to me a
distinction in words merely.

"Reason: Doubtless. All distinctions are merely
in words until one has learned to see them independ-
ent of words. But you must go and mend that
bipod on which you are sitting; for how can one
think at ease and exhaustively, when he is all the
time propping up his basis from without ?

"Understanding: I cannot understand you.
{Exit.) »

I think that the reader who has gone over our
previous ground may be trusted to sympathize
with poor "Understanding," who plays the role of
common-sense in the above colloquy. He should
detect both the misuse of the notion of objective
space as a quantity, and the distortion of the nega-
tive into a positive quality in a merely logical field.

How can space, in the mere fact of its being con-
tinuous, be held as "limiting itself" because, for-
sooth, it can have no other limit? How does the
word Ivmit get into the discussion at all? One may
have said in an unnecessary criticism that space is


152 PLURIVERSE

unlimited — unnecessary and impertinent because
the very constitution or nature or meaning of space
would, if called upon, exclude limit — but why
should it be called upon to reject an idle qualifica-
tion, to touch a pitch that would defile it? It is
no more unlimited than it is unpainted, or unedu-
cated ; the im excludes all qualification ; yet by mere
verbal mention in the same connection a logical ex-
pression soils the pure reality.

It is as if a crier should go through the streets
proclaiming that Caesar's wife is not unchaste; the
announcement may be true, and is surely commenda-
tory, but the parties in interest would hardly be
grateful for it. It was held as slanderous in our
courts, that one man had said to another, "You
never stole a sheep, oh, no ! "

The aggravation is still heavier when the fact
(that any space as given or contemplated can be
regarded as limited only by more of the same) is
construed as rendering space self-limited, and as
countenancing various other claims of self -relation :
especially that of the ego, which, although confessed
as an "impossibility" for understanding and imag-
ination, is speculative fact. It is Harris's illusion
that the unlimited gets unity and limit from its
mention as the or this — a nominal concept — as
if the unknowable were really known as such. This
is the sphinx riddle : he who knows the universe shall
be swallowed by it. There is no such knowledge, nor
any such object for knowledge.

Especially Harris labored under the Hegelian
obsession that negation is determination, always
positive in its results; that all assertion is afSrma-


SELF-RELATION 153

tlve, the negation of negation; that destruction is
logically impossible. If the red slayer thinks he
slays, he makes the mistake of his life ; he knows not
of the cunning ways in which the dialectic can pass
and turn again. That a thing has no quality — is
not that a quality.'' The unknowable — is it not
known as such? Does not the breath that would
vacate it come back into your own face? Not be-
ing? well, since you mention it, is it not one kind of
being? Nothing — if it is not something, how can
you think of it? or the ego — if not self -known, how
does it think of itself?

But Kant said well, you do not think of it ; you
merely talk about it. The Kantian yataghan cuts
the props from under these dialectic constructions —
these verbal concepts which no percepts, which no
experience may confirm. Negation that does not
vacate and destroy is but a scrap of paper. What
is meant by nothing does not get into thought, nor
into print. Non-being is flatus vocis — a mist that
rises in our dreams from the compost of decay and
death. With Parmenides behind us we shall hardly
countenance a not-being which can be only in a de-
lusive array of words.

The solution of all this dialectic confusion, in
which the plain man's understanding is insulted, and
truth is stultified as impossible or contradictory, lies
in the fact that its propagators have not suiBcient
dignity or self-respect to question what has unfor-
tunately become conventional — to discern that
many words are misused, and that many have no
meaning whatsoever. The greatest mistake of all
is that the world must be rational, and that there


164 PLURIVERSE

must be possible a true statement and explanation
of it, commensurate with our finite capacity. How
puerile, or at least how inexpert, is this argument
that since the whole can have no other cause it must
be the cause of itself — even though the doctrine
shall revolt our understanding, and pretend that
words need no basis in empirical reality — boasting
with Novalis, that "although Philosophy can bake
no bread she can give us God, freedom and immor-
tality" -'— three words of wholly problematical mean-
ing. A cause that would really explain should
hardly fail us for daily bread ; it might even afford
an occasional pot of beer.

It will be perceived, as regards Mr. Harris's recog-
nition of the psychological embarrassment in think-
ing self -relation — which he like the majority of
thinkers, has to confess as mechanically contra-
dictory — his main assurance as to first cause being
"causa sui" is that it is the only possible cause or
reason tliat can be used as explanation. He would
be well disposed to say with Fichte, "Ask not for the
how — be satisfied with the fact." He would join
heartily with Prof. Ladd in boundless reverence for
the unaccountable "prime fact of knowledge." But
if one shall say to them. Have it your own way : there
can be no other first cause than "causa sui": yet
how if there is no cause at all, in the sense of radi-
cal explanation to us or to reason? The merely
formal phrase, "causa sui," will not come down to
the relief of mechanical sense, or of imagination en-
deavoring to picture the self-swallowing stunt, or of
a thing's being its own creator before it is born.
Admit that "causa sui" is the only logical state-


SELF-RELATION 155

ment of the problem; that or any other statement
may be worthless for explanation — which wiU re-
quire a certain treatment of the time element — which
they have not yet achieved. Every active relation
implies a lapse of time, which divides the instant in-
tegrity of any hypothetic self-relation. This is the
difficulty with all self-relation, as a principle, or a
fertility, that the miracle which it is to perform by
its activity is already pre-supposed as accomplished
in its divine nature or essence.

It recalls the juggler, Katerfelte, "with his hair
on end at his own wonders — wondering for his
bread."


CHAPTER VI
THE NEGATIVE

SINCE we find that the only plausible reason of
things is reason as a reason for itself by self-
relation — and that this is impossible logically,
and considerable only as seeming a psychological fact
in empirical "self-consciousness" — and that this
seeming fact (self -consciousness) is by our highest
authorities determined as an illusion; and since we
find, in the problem of causation, that no being can
be held to contain potentially another being, neither
to empirically produce another being ; there remains
only, to account for existence, the presumption of
its eternity as matter of fact, whose only ground of
being, in either fact or observation, is the void, con-
ceivable as in lieu of all content, and named, for
speculative purposes, the negative.

It may be admitted (at least by us, who live only
to surely die) that a real void (however may be the
case of a logical one) would vacate all being and
distinction; but since being in general persists in
spite of our solipsistic failure, the question remains,
as to being in general, whether there is a principle
of necessity which eternally holds and held it posi-
tive in fact — not antagonized but rather sustained
and emphasized by the void, which should prove
only a suggestion or shadow of our own finite fate

156


THE NEGATIVE 157

and limitation, against the ever-living truth and
fact that being must be.

Parmenides argued earnestly that "not-being" is
only a play upon words, with no thought behind
them.

Hegel argued, quite as earnestly, that in the world
of pure thought, where the matter should be deter-
mined, the vitality of the negative is essentially the
life of being, and that negation is "positive in its
result."

In the same spirit Heracleitus made opposition the
basis of distinction, and strife the father of things.
Said Parmenides:

"Listen and I will instruct thee, what are the two
only paths of research open to thinking. One path
is : That.Being doth be, and Non-Being is not : this
is the way of Conviction, for Truth follows hard in
her footsteps. The other path is : That Being is
not (All) and Non-Being must be. This one, I teU
thee in truth, is an all-incredible pathway ; for thou
never canst know what is not (for none can con-
ceive it) nor canst thou give it expression, for one
thing are Thinking and Being.

"Never I ween shalt thou learn that Being can
be of what is not. For is is of Being ; Nothing must
needs not be.

"What is is birthless and deathless, whole and
moveless and ever enduring. Never it was or shall
be, but the all simultaneously now is, one con-
tinuous one.

"How or whence it hath sprung I shall not per-
mit thee to tell me ; neither to think 'of what is not' ;
for none can say or imagine how Not-Is becomes


158 PLURIVERSE

Is, or, what should have stirred it, after or before
its beginning, to issue from nothing?

"Men have set up for themselves twin shapes to be
named by Opinion (one they cannot set up, and
herein they wander in error), and they have made
them distinct in their natures, and marked them with
tokens. . . . All things now being marked with
the names of Light and of Darkness — yea, set apart
by the powers of One or the Other, so that the All
is at once fvM of light and inmsible darTcness, both
being equal, and naught being common to OTie with
the other."

As unfalteringly as he defined idealism against
the face of experience, so Hegel thus announced the
positive negative, with its essential contradiction,
as the logical necessity of reason, and the ^only pos-
sibility of philosophy:

"The only thing ( !) essentially necessary to an
insight of the method of scientific evolution is a
knowledge of the logical nature of the negative : that
it is positive in its results. . . . Its self-contradic-
tion does not resvilt in zero, or the abstract nothing,
but rather in the subversion of its special content
(or topic) only. ... In the result is preserved
essentially that from which it resulted."

This, then, is philosophy: what is not, and cost
nothing, is the matrix and the mother of what is ; yon
mist that rises from the rotting compost heap — it
is the breath of life. . . . the secret then, the
problem, the Mystery, the Veil, and what is behind
it ? — The VOICE is "dialectic" — the Vision is of
a fig-leaf on the occult genitals of Death.

Dialectic, which for Plato meant conversation, as


THE NEGATIVE 159

rendering opposite sides, is an esoteric diversion, in
which the negative has been exploited as a quasi
positive. Whether seriouslj or otherwise, Demo-
critus is credited or discredited with the saving,
"Being is by nothing more real than not-being."
Equivalently he might have said, "Visible and ma-
terial body is no more real than invisible and formal
mind" — and then added, "Logical concepts are as
real as rational percepts ; and but for Aristotle, and
especially but for Kant, the notion might still be
tolerated." The whim is as old as Lucifer, and as
man's fall through knowledge, that by some invet-
erate perversity nothing must be something. Even
Parmenides, however stoutly affirming as the only
"truth" that "being alone is, and non-being is not,"
confessed to an "opinion," held with all the con-
viction of empirical life, that there was a being of
not-being, which yet should be carefully ignored.

(Even Shakespeare furthered the jest, in "King
Lear." The king had retorted on some extrava-
gance of his "fool," that it was "nothing" ; and could
Nuncle make no use of nothing? This was a pity,
since the king had so much of it : all his rents footed
up to just that amount; whereat the loyal Kent re-
marked, "This is not altogether fool, my lord.")

"Nothing" proves a very available stuff; it is at
least half of the stock of metaphysics. In science
too, it has indispensable uses. A couple of gallons
of nothing, for instance, are indispensable in the
experiment proving that in vacuo the guinea and the
feather fall synchronously, and that a wheel wiU re-
volve therein for an unaccountable time. It would
be necessary, too, in the proof that the resisting and


160 PLUHIVERSE

negative air is the positive sustenance and fulcrum
of a bird's flight through it, and that in fact a bird
could not fly in a vacuum at all. This obvious in-
ference is very consolatory in any conjecture as to
the forces requisite to the motion of the celestial
orbs ; for if a planet's atmosphere is wholly its own,
that envelope should not retard its motion in clear
space; and as our moon has no atmosphere at all,
one whiff from a goose feather should suffice to re-
volve it tin time shall be no more.

Even thus we may gossip at the verge of the
insidious maelstrom that has engulfed aU the philoso-
phic sails that have defied its vortex. The fault was
not in their stars but in themselves that they went
down as underlings. The rash assertion of Hegel
in the beginning of his logic, that being and not-
being are the same, should have been of itself a signal
of logical distress. The same? Certainly, weighed
as abstractions, mere topics of thought, they are as
such the same. Even contradictions are facts, for
discussion, or dialectic. Reality, negation, nonsense,
the unutterable, the unthinkable, are alike real topics
for metaphysical talk; but they have no basis or
foothold in the dependable world ; they are verbal
concepts which have no perceptual corroboration —
adjectives flying regardless of appropriate nouns.
The moment that being and not-being are required
to serve as qualifications of any objective reality^
their difference is evident and fatal. All the value in
the world, and all distinction of values, are in being,
while all non-being is alike and worthless. When it is
said that non-being has being, or that nothings are
somethings, what are the empirical percepts that


THE NEGATIVE 161

should staminate this fluorescent nonentity? They
have no concrete life or force. No Kantian can
aiHrm non-being.

Experience and history, reflection upon sleep and
death, the admonition that there is no knowledge nor
device in the grave whither thou goest, have indeed
impressed upon us the sad truth that there is and
was for us a condition of not-being; but these em-
pirical considerations have no bearing on the simi-
larity of being and not-being save as logical abstrac-
tions regardless of their concrete filling or special
content. In saying that being and not-being are the
same, Hegel could not mean that life and death are
the same ; his logical interest lay in the fact that it
requires force to destroy as well as to create and that,
therefore, in the self -relation of the ego as subject-
object, the objective or quasi passive side implicates
an equal subjective initiative. But the goal of his
logic was development of the Absolute Spirit as the
essential activity and process of self-relation.

Stoutly ignoring the unknown root of aU sense and
human understanding, Hegel fell back upon the
purely logical and dialectic Inevitable of Heraclei-
tus, and as a merely formal and speculative propo-
sition the Inevitable is sure and simple enough, if
we allow the single presumption that opposition is
the basis of distinction — or, as Heracleitus phrased
it, that "strife is the father of all things." If be-
ing is such and conceivable, not as an independent
entity, but only as the opposite of not-being, they
cannot be separated; either assures the presence of
the other, and so the inevitable existence of both.
Total non-being is impossible in or for thought.


162 PLURIVERSE

The being of a hole is as real as that of a plug ; as a
mere topic of thought the one is quite as convers-
able as the other. But such conversation is mere
diversion. If we were comparing reality and un-
reality, the one, as a topic, would be as real as the
other; but that kind of reality is mere supposition,
a play of fancy, the stuff that dreams are made on,
a saying that the hole is essential in the doughnut.

Negation is mighty only by reason of its positive
given force. In a world of purely logical forms and
schemes this were the acme of triumphant thinMng.
But when the plain man asks after its results, he is
put off with the glory of the action; the strength
displayed in destruction is the same as that proper
for creation. But if negation is positive in its
results, wherein does it oppose assertion? and by
what means shall we get any denial or any destruc-
tive result? Our only inference is that assertion
and negation are alike merely verbally constructive,
and that real destruction is logically impossible ; the
void remains.

Contemplating the field of psychological experi-
ence, Heracleitus seems to have been the first to
signalize the fact that one is made by limiting, and
that everything gets special existence not only by
contrast, but by opposition and strife with its en-
vironment, which serves as background and frame,
and gives it distinction, relief and individuality. In
the consciousness of lights and shadows, and of pains
and pleasures ; in the contemplation of the ups and
downs of fortune ; in the estimation of size and value,
and the appreciation of the present as in memory of


THE NEGATIVE 163

the past, everywhere he found the One getting its
distinction, emphasis and eclat through a compensa-
tion of the Other. This is the most striking and
poetical lesson of experience, and it oriented his
metaphysical speculation to the merely relative truth
that being depends upon not-being.

We may say here, somewhat gratuitously per-
haps, that this was rather a poetical than a philoso-
phical observation on the part of Heracleitus. Had
he enforced and brought home his principle —
that "strife is the father of things," or, that oppo-
sition is the basis of distinction — he would have
had to found reason upon unreason, as equally
authoritative, and conclusion would have become
impossible.

It is our instant necessity here to see that however
contrast and compensation enter into and emphasize
distinction, they do not infer nor require the oppo-
sition which has been utilized to construe the in-
evitable by making the mere contrast of being and
not-being the productive ground of true being, on
the theory that negation is positive in its result.
This result, properly considered, is merely logical,
formal and schematic. Let non-being, in its tran-
scendent thought-world, be ever so much a reality
and a proper topic for contemplation — whereof we
may consistently discuss the existence, or the pos-
sibility, as well as we may the prevalence of the con-
tent of being — yet we instantly perceive that being
proper embraces and identifies the whole real world,
and that not-being is only a mental supposition of
death, which, realized, would vacate the field of
thought. It lives only as a h3rpothetic mental re-


164. PLURIVERSE

lation or supposition. The fact appears that mere
opposition will not assure being, and that there may
be difference and distinction without antagonism,
peacefully side by side, however contrast may em-
phasize it: this -because contrast may come as well
from new excess in nature as from the negation and
non-being of the passing or the past.

Granting that a relative non-being is necessary to
logical or conceptual being, and that conceptual dif-
ference is necessary to logical and truthful identity ;
granted that dark lines and shadows are necessary
and relevant to the "high lights" of the picture;
granted that it were practically the same disaster,
whether all the light or all the darkness went away ;
you are yet nowhere near the affirmation that dark-
ness is necessary to light, or that non-being is the
ground of being, or that opposition rather than
friendly difference is necessary to subjective distinc-
tion. Nature solves this problem by her purely gra-
tuitous and miraculous excess and bounty, putting
all assertion into being, and outfacing all pretense
of positive negation with her everlasting Yea. *'God
is light," said the ancient, "and in Him is no dark-
ness at aU." Yet "one star differs from another
star in glory"; there is no cosmic shame; there is
no cosmic evil; but there are degrees of light which
afford assthetic shadows of their own order and gen-
ius. The all-bounteous Good of Nature ruffles with
compensating waves the deep that knows no change,
and lends variety and beauty to the spiritual world
as fortune favors one with ten talents, and another
with five, and another with only one. And if he who
has none at all shall renounce a losing game and


THE NEGATIVE 166

destroy himsdf, who knows what compensation may
attend his faith in another world than this.

We may illustrate the utter relativity, or the
purely mental hypothecation of "the negative," by
the revolution of a spoked wheel. Fancy such a
wheel before us, on a track that leads to the right.
We first lift the wheel from the track and revolve
it around its own centre, its top rolling to the right
while its bottom goes to the left. If now, while
the wheel is still revolving, we set it down upon the
track, the bottom will catch and hold to the track
in a punctual and motionless contact ; the centre will
move to the right with the same speed with which
the bottom was before moving toward the left, and
the top wiU go to the right with twice the speed of
the centre, while the leftward motion of the bottom
is lost, being shifted to the centre : there is no longer
any leftward motion of the wheel in the real world.
But if now we go with the wheel — fix our identity
and viewpint at the centre of the wheel, regardless
of its environment, the leftward motion of the bottom
is as rapid and real as it was before it caught the
track — but this motion is only assumed as relative
to an artificial and unreal viewpoint — there is no
one living at the centre of the wheel, and there is no
such backward or negating motion for any observer
in the world of real experience.

We may readily convert this demonstration to the
assumed "positive result" of the negative as a factor
in the sustenance or production of being. Let it
be granted that in a static and changeless world,
where contrast or even opposition were necessary to
distinction, non-being would be necessary to being.


166 PLURIVERSE

But such a static world is a purely mental supposi-
tion; there is no such world in time's reality. On
the contrary in the gratuitous becoming of the ex-
cess of Nature, being gets vital distinction in the
on-coming future, and becomes itself the negative or
background in a world new-born. Here is no Hera-
cleitic strife or struggle for mere being — no grudg-
ing result of the mere activity of negation and oppo-
sition, but rather the bounty of a miraculous be-
coming, ever new, and ever more.

We remarked above that in saying that "being
and not-being are the same" Hegel did not pretend
that life and death are the same. But why not, if
he meant anything that concerns humanity? As a
literary fact the words life and death and truth have
no patronage in transcendental philosophy; neither
does any fact of experience have weight in formal
logic — a kind of esoteric toy which, like a frag-
ment of looking glass in the hands of a mischievous
schoolboy, can be made to throw artificial reflections
into startled eyes.

It is logically true that one is made by limiting —
that its determination is negation — as well by ex-
clusion as by inclusion; and it is ever true that in
contemplation, as in a picture, light and being get
emphasis and Sclat from darkness and death. But
this contemplation is but artistic conception. When
the inexorable sure method demands the percepts of
this fruitful negation — the basic experience that
should staminate this fluorescent inanity — it finds
that the real negative, as the smouldering compost
from which the negative concept is exhaled, is the sad
fate of humanity when the lights are out and the


THE NEGATIVE 167

curtain is down, and the voice of the Preacher ad-
monishes us that there is no wisdom nor device nor
knowledge in the grave whither we go. Transcen-
dental dialectic, positive negation, truth as contra-
diction and essential opposition and inconsequent
process — all this is but a house of cards, the base-
less fabric of a vision, an insubstantial pageant that
will leave not a rack behind. No less, it is the best
that philosophy has done, or promises to do.

We should gather from the citations foregoing
that in self-relation and positive negation the Ger-
man genius has exhausted the only sources or
ground of cosmic explanation. If the Whole is to
be in any way exploited it must be by either itself
or nothing — a desperate alternative surely ; yet
we have seen however that "nothing can come from
nothing," the negative may be at least logically
fruitful, and "not altogether fool."

But the transcendental exfoliation exhausted all
the fertility of its ground. Poor Psyche became so
soiled and mussed-up by dialectic manipulation that
her sacred character was compromised. If mere
logical concepts could be posed as realities, mind-
stuff was no better than matter-stuff, which was
equally feasible and less disputable. Besides, Hegel
had insisted upon exalting his Absolute to the very
questionable eminence of Personality: "The high-
est, steepest thought is Personality." Such a claim
was shadowed not only by all the atrocities of the
old, but by the present controversy over the Chris-
tian divinity.

The Good has a promising name, but it is not
adequate as a first principle. It is tainted with


168 PLURIVERSE

passion and personality ; it is partial and hence un-
just ; its favor to the present depletes the justice due
to the unborn. There is but so much for all, and
what comparative has a surplus to spare? Shall
not justice suffice? The Good reeks with the old
duplexity; justice alone is passionless and integral
and safe ; for what hinders that the unbalanced Good
should turn into evil at its personal whim? It does
not appear that the Good had been deserved, and the
flush on its countenance argues distemperature in
the bosom of fate.

Surely we must welcome the Good; the downpour
of gratuitous Nature dissolves the logical necessity
which renders negation positive in its restilts; but
for philosophy as explanation the gift of nature
still taxes the wonder which the charm of dialectic
had for its moment meretriciously disenchanted.
The secret remains intact. The Good is not the best.

In any event, personality is the last philosophical
canon of divinity. "Ever not quite" is a motto par-
ticularly significant here. The groundlings of skep-
ticism will degrade its most spiritual conceptions with
visceral necessities which impeach the sincerity of
unqualified devotion. There is a flaw in its suprem-
acy, a fig-leaf on the statue. Not even hatred and
bigotry shall be genuine while they spare a loin-
cloth to the uplifted Christ.

We cannot wonder that a surfeit of personal ideal-
ism put forth a score of post-Kantian phUosophemes
in the direction of materialism, all in favor of a de-
personalized intelligence which dispensed with God
while utilizing at will His attributes. Schopen-
hauer charged in from the field of pantheism with


THE NEGATIVE 169

a blind and striving will, still abetted by an immi-
nent clairvoyancy — most happily characterized by
our Professor Howison as "a kind of Blind Tom,"
Hartmann followed with the Unconscious — a
merely titular pose of the subconscious, as some-
what that can see without eyes, and speak without
articulation — the voice of the heart, as of Jacobi,
and the ''something higher than science" which
Schelling (with many others) said he surely knew.
Then came Duhring with the Actual, freshly qualify-
ing the "thing in itself" (which Kant had left as
merely problematical), as the real thing that by a
vacation of solipsism, and a restoration of practical
sanity, would restore reality to the common sense
which idealism had abused. And then came Lange
(contemporary in time, and consecutive only in the
process of mental evolution), overweaning the rally-
ing cry of "back to Kant" with an impeachment of
that Master himself. For Kant had rushed where
Aristotle could tread only tentatively, and had
rather conceitedly assumed to name all of the "cate-
gories" (the innate faculties or laws of thought) in
accordance with some determinate principle. Lange,
breaking down Kant's perfunctory bars to scientific
progress, insisted that the a priori as well as the
merely sensuous was divinely "given," and that the
laws of the mind, even as the laws of matter, shall be
codified by induction — so clearing the path for that
trend toward materialism, or toward that mitigation
of its esoteric crudity, which has encumbered the
post-Kantian regime.

And Lange forthright staunched his criticism of
the "Critique of Pure Reasoft" by the instance of


170 PLURIVERSE

motion as one of the "forms" of sense, equally with
space and time, and possibly the key to various para-
doxes, which it factually is.

I shall introduce in the next chapter a neglected
handmaid of Truth, a sort of metaphysical Cinder-
ella, under the title of Ancillary Evidence, hoping
thereby to lend something of dignity to that catch-
word, "ever not quite," which Professor James
adopted as Pluralism's heraldic device. Her cre-
dentials shall be at once signal and authentic. There
are in philosophy many loose ends of the inevitable
duplexity, many theoretical oppositions whose poles
do not quite meet ; there is a pentimbra that defeats
every claim to explicit definition and contact. For
example, in the saying (as old as Heracleitus) "be-
ing and not being are the same," there is this dis-
crepancy at least that they cannot be quite the same,
so long as the means are different or supposing that
they are the same, the same is not quite the same, for,
logically, the same is another that is like — there
needs two for a sameness, as well as an identity for a
diiference. So nothing is not quite that ; if it were,
one could not be a thinking being and make it
topical.

But this ancOlary penumbra has more serious im-
portance in the larger fields of philosophy, where
ultimate distinction wavers and confuses definition.
The static and dynamic viewpoints cannot be held
utterly asunder; they are both feasible, but if they
did not somehow compromise their opposition
thought and life would be impossible. Contradic-
tion cannot utterly contradict, nor can being ex-
clusive be. Kant said well that all entities have


THE NEGATIVE 171

community, and that all value and quantity have
intensive degree, which scales somewhere between
entity and zero, but by the ancillary shading which
our title adumbrates ; there is no modus vivendi with-
out it. The present tense, where we must live, is
but a hole in the ground, if you withdraw the ancil-
lary presence of the past and the future; yet the
metalogical life, our Cinderella of all work, as a
sprite rising from Truth's bottomless well, clings
stoutly to the skirts of the vanishing past, while
trembling on the verge of the precipitous future.


CHAPTER VII

ANCILLARY UNITY AND THE PRESENT
TENSE

IT is written that there can be no science of the
fleeting. If this is truth it should seem that for
us, children of the fleeting time, there can be no
science at aU — a contingency which the experts
have done little to assure. Kant at least, with his
two inseparable stems of an unknown root, shall re-
main hopeless of any punctual unity of cognition in
the present or in any other tense.

We have criticised Kant for inadvertence — as in
his call for gravitation to "hold the universe to-
gether," and his description of space as "an infinite
quantity," and his notion of reality "fading to zero
by degrees"; but we have not heretofore charged
him with self-contradiction. Yet it must now ap-
pear that his most recondite studies had neither
united nor unravelled those intricacies of the present
tense which ever recall that well of Democritus, be-
tween whose implacable walls Truth escapes in an
infinite divisibility. Neither do we find the embar-
rassment much abated by the discontent of Messieurs
Bergson, James and others with a merely conceptual
division between the future and the past — they de-
manding a perceptual and empirical reality in the

173


ANCILLARY UNITY, PRESENT TENSE 173

present, which the past has lost and the future has
not yet attained.

As for Kant, we may readily indicate the divers-
ity of his viewpoints. In his "Transcendental Ana-
lytic" (M. Muller, tr., p. 150) he says: "In mere
succession existence always comes and goes (?) and
never assumes the slightest quantity."

Yet on page 169 this is explicitly reversed: "Be-
tween two moments there is always a certain time,
and between two states in these two moments there
is always a difference which must have a certain
quantity. . . . Every transition from one state
into another takes place in a certain time between
two moments — a state between two states."

This naive reverie merely shares the popular
confusion, and lacks any principle of definition.
Rather, in fact, he disclaims any defining principle,
saying: "All laws of nature, without distinction,
are subject to higher principles of the understand-
ing, which they apply to particular cases of ex-
perience. . . . Experience furnishes each case to
which a rule applies."

This is the essence of pragmatism: that experi-
ence furnishes the "rule" of reason. What works
explains.

There is this to be said for Bergson, James, and
their followers, that if there is any radical difference
between life and death, or between being and not-
being, or in fact between this varied and wonderful
universe or multiverse and nothing at all (if this may
have any meaning) , there should be a radical differ-
ence between the present tense and either the future
or the past. We can hardly outflank the postulate


174 PLURIVERSE

that only what it is real ; yet neither can we conceive
how a nature that is only as and while becoming
can fully have become and wholly be. Yet if we
know at all we know that we are. Life is real, it is
earnest, it is punitive. A rap on one's head gives
a conAdction of reality that no idea can come forth
from it and refute. However naively or unphilo-
sophically, we do habitually assume a certain breadth
and fullness of duration in the moment. Its appre-
hension is expansive. Our ancillary Cinderella
clings to and drags back the skirts of the reluctant
past with one hand, and with the other reaches
forth to anticipate the future. And just here is
the crux of philosophy : while the fact is real enough,
what have we to say about it — is it a concept or a
percept, or both, or neither, for explanation or
truth?

Clearly perceiving that a merely conceptual or
ideal division between the past and the future does
not do justice to the vital and in one sense exclusively
present, James proposed (to spite the "intellec-
tualists," possibly) that reality must come in defi-
nite empirical "pulses," "drops," "beads." (M.
Bergson say "explosions.") I quote James's post-
humous "Problems of Philosophy," page 155:

"Either your experience is of no content, no
change, or it is of a perceptible amount of change.
Your acquaintance with reality grows literally by
beads or drops of perception."

Had any one else made this assertion in the pres-
ence of my dear friend, the proponent would have
been immediately advised of its crudity and one-
sidedness, as merely "one way of putting it."


ANCILLARY UNITY, PRESENT TENSE 175

Of course there is a certain warrant for this sug-
gestion of beads and drops and pulses, in the nature
of sensation, as involving the alternation of atten-
tion and rest. Sensation comes in change; there is
no call of attention to the same. And the grades of
difference, in the time during which an attention is
held, determine the length of various functions and
features — such as words and phrases, sermons and
plays, visits, vacations, et cetera. There are many
ancillary averages of stress and strain in the busi-
ness world.

The earth itself has its tidal pulsations and
climatic compensations; everywhere there is trend
and check. The wound-up world delivers its resil-
ience to the swing of some inexorable pendulum,
else the too-eager bud would explode into its flower ;
the incontinent potential would rush into the
arms of the actual, and "the secret too long pent"
would dissolve in we know not what of fiasco and
calamity.

But the philosopher's trouble begins with the at-
tempt at explicit definition, in the shading of these
beads and pulses into one another in a continual
process. The fault appears in conceptually punc-
tualizing the attack of thought upon experience, in
a centre-to-centre directness which excludes all col-
lateral and ancillary supplement or adumbration.
There is a penumbra which defeats the exactitude of
every assumed connection. There is no explicit
categorical punctuality in either our physical or our
mental vision. The pupil of the eye — and of "the
mind's eye" as well — is large ; it covers more than
we look at. However we focus our attention, there


176 PLURIVERSE

is a field of vision in which any intrusion is appre-
hended.

It is but a whim, sajring that while we may Bee
one object we must count three. I can see three by
the same intuition in which a proofreader detects
an error in a word, by the shape of it. This is not
as saying I can see seven. While my capacity is
open, the entrance is limited ; like Mercutio's wound,
it is not as wide as a church door, but it will do. It
is large enough to see motion, as several places in
one time, Zeno to the contrary notwithstanding.

What have been characterized separately as imder-
standing and sense are so pragmatically interperva-
sive that they are only hypercritically distinguish-
able. The large pupil of the mind's eye vacates
conceptual contradictions by factual experience.

The empiricists have sought to staunch their
specialty by citing the stoppages in the production
of the connected sections of a cinematographic film.
The theory claimed as exemplified in the manufac-
ture of the films is that between the sections, photo-
graphed one after another, there is a distinct pause
for each picture, determined by and known from the
construction of the photographing apparatus —
following the ingenious and interesting conceit that
the light requires time in which to act upon the
collodion. This dead stop in the current time ap-
peals to the empiricists as the bead, or drop, or pulse
of the present tense, disrupted, however briefly, from
the current time.

But this is a very negligent hypothesis. Either
of these beads, as a perceptible bulk, is capable of an
infinite division, in search of its ideal centre, which


ANCILLARY UNITY, PRESENT TENSE 177

alone could be the "true" present. And practically
speaking, the machine can make the beads thick or
thin, according to its rapiditj in taking the pictures.

Moreover the notion of this dead stop may be
rather clever than accurate. Possibly the light
might act upon the coUodion while passing, as well
as when standing still. A stick swished through
water does not need a stoppage in order to get wet.

But the chief interest of the cinema machine is not
in its presumptive demonstration of a stoppage of
motion to realize the present tense, but rather in
its proof of the possibility of motion, which Zeno
and his followers denied — claming that motion in
the present instant would require that a perceptual
object should have at least two places in one and
the same time, which they regarded as an impossi-
bility.

Speaking of Lange and his "History of Material-
ism," I remarked upon his calling Kant to account
for omitting motion from his list of categories, or
native forms of mentation. Kant himself in a single
instance classed motion as of that character. It
would be a borrowing of trouble, discussing here
whether or not motion is within the grasp of
"quantity, quality, modality and relation" ; the pos-
sibility of motion will be determined by consideration
of time, space and vision as punctual unities —
which they are not.

Observe first, in the case of a "motion picture" —
say of the uplifting of an arm — that the real
motion of the film and the picture-motion on the
screen, although synchronous are not coincident ; the
arm may move three feet in the picture while moving


178 PLURIVERSE

three inches in the film; and this discrepancy may
be exaggerated by moving the screen. The fact to
be noticed here is that the motion on the screen is not
of the identity of the sections of the film, but of
their difference, which is mental; the motion con-
sists in the unity of several sensuous places in one
mental time.

When you whirl a curlicue with a burning torch,
and make a fiery ring, the ring is motion; it is the in-
finite present places of the torch in one instant of
mental vision, or time. Your vision is not of the
torch, which shows no form, but of the manyness of
its own present tenses and places in a one time for
you.

It may be helpful to recall here our observations
on the subject of size, as to an eye supposed as large
as the earth; that the 1,000 miles per hour of the
earth's peripheral motion would be withdrawn into
the potentiality of the eye — the Many of individual
experience into the creative One, which is Creator
not by effort, or intention, but by essential and
eternal reason. So in the motion-picture, where the
movement of the arm is (not quite whoUy) the dif-
ference of the sections of the film, the apparent
sweep of the arm is graduated by the distance from
the camera to the screen. The motion is relative,
and real only in experience as seen from the dynamic
viewpoint.

Some of these paradoxes of philosophy, and even
of religion, are wholly gratuitous. Let Achilles him-
self propose the paradox, that he cannot overtake
the tortoise, and we see at once that to be a philoso-
pher he has to be a knave ; the mathematical require-


ANCILLARY UNITY, PRESENT TENSE 179

ment of the feat is wholly impertinent to its empiri-
cal accomplishment.

The theoretical puzzle of Achilles is that in the
punctual unity of each repeated effort he must
achieve the distance between himself and the reptile
at the outset — during which accomplishment the
latter will of course have advanced somewhat: and
this recurring somewhat, however short its space,
renews the whole problem — for Achilles' next effort
is assumed to be spent in the covering of that space,
while the tortoise gains a new one, offering the same
difficulty in the mathematical impossibility of ex-
hausting a whole by taking away successive fractions
of it, since the remainder will ever be a whole. The
absurdity of the story appears in the assumption
that the athlete is intellectually hobbled, in his re-
peated efforts, punctually one by one, so that he may
not continue to do his best as in the first endeavor,
but must waste a whole unit on the little space which
his rival has added to the course; and it is this
restraint, which in practice he would never dream of
(and which might be in another country), that en-
cumbers an empirical proposition with a conceptual
impossibility, uncalled for and impertinent.

The paradox is equally trival when viewed mathe-
matically. If Achilles must win in mathematical
rather than in athletic form, he should have a
"show" by the rules of the game. Given the premise
that he has the superior speed, we demand the per-
centage of his superiority. If his excellence is 25
per cent., then in four units of any conceivable effort
he will reach the tortoise, and win the race.

We may well doubt that Professor Zeno displayed


180 PLURIVERSE

these paradoxes on his centre-tahle for the delecta-
tion of his philosophical friends. But I have a
mounted owl, from whose beak hangs a card bear-
ing this question:

Was ist nichtf

No one of my visitors has answered it.

We cannot dismiss and dispose of motion as
manyness of places — any better than we can shade
entity to zero by degrees. There is a word or a
thought missing here that shall grasp a vital unity
in continuity and process and vanishing intensity
as a whole, a category, a unique and ultimate given
mental fact. What boots a mere manyness without
a limiting discretion telling how many? We are
out for blood, for the life of reality in one entity.
If motion's manyness has forty thousand places the
category's great revenge has stomach for them all.
Time warms us of a contimiity without discretion —
the matter of experience which conception violates
by cutting it into formal pieces with which to effect
a more punctual contact with the mind. Again we
say the pupil of the mind's eye is large. The most
punctual centre is adumbrated with ancillary circles
through which our closest inspection dives 'into the
well of Democritus — the infinite divisibility between
matter and form.

The thinker may readily juggle the consistency of
motion and time, saying that each is a process, and
they may advance coincidently, side by side. Un-
fortunately for this arrangement, time has but one
uniform speed, while motion in any one time may


ANCILLARY UNITY, PRESENT TENSE 181

have various degrees of speed, and thus break the
identity of that friendly adjustment.

If motion consists of manyness of places, a whole
of motion demands a multiplicity and an extension
in the imputed unity of time and attention. I see
no hope for this in realization, as a science of the
fleeting, except by an ancillary enlargement and a
capability of the grasp of manyness in the nominal
unity and identity of the spiritual one — a categori-
cal faculty or thought-form for process, continu-
ity, activity, motion, or in a word, time.

But all this is matter for philosophy, which the
Mystic does not presume to explain.


CHAPTER VIII
JESUS AND FREE WILL

LET us hope that we have learned somewhat,
even if no more than negatively, from the
route that we have gone over. We should
have learned that intelligence, as we realize it, is a
gift from some "alien energy," and that it fails of
any originating principle of becoming, or any neces-
sity of being. Neither position nor negation is fer-
tile; something cannot impregnate itself, nor know
itself, nor move itself, nor assume any other self-
relation; and as for negation or nothingness being
actively or processively positive in its results; and
as for being, as statically taken, being inevitable
because logically posited in the necessity of con-
trast or opposition — we have seen that the miracle
of gratuitous nature furnishes sufficing contrast by
its ever-new position in the everlasting yea, and
leaves the dead negative, with a mourning wisp of
memory to be sure, to bury its dead.

But our most reverent humility and self-denial
have still to consist with a sense of our real original-
ity and unavoidable responsibility, which keeps our
philosophy at war with religion and policy. There
is no philosophical objection to "free will." There
are imquestionable powers or principles, whether
rational or blind, and their only philosophical de-

182


JESUS AND FREE WILL 183

termination halts between monism and pluralism.
The miracle of originality is not at all degraded by
its quasi appearance in human consciousness, nor is
the wonder or the problem of it alleviated by its
exaltation to a divine supremacy; on the contrary,
such an exaltation disrupts it from psychological
fact, only to embarrass its hypothesis with the ob-
jections to which we have found the sacred claims
of monism to be not quite impeccable.

Time may prove that we have been far and away
too "fresh" in our naive admiration and wonder at
autocratic prestige and impossible unity and suprem-
acy, where there is really but a uniform democracy,
an everywhere, uncentered, and no better than every
here. If we should have the good fortune to touch
bottom in the Mystery, and the sacred should become
secular, it would be but a nine days' wonder ; we may
well doubt that it would greatly affect our religion
or our politics, or our worldly ambitions. The ob-
scure and sedentary nature of philosophy is not due
to any settled conviction of its hopelessness, at least
not so much as to indifference to its problems, whose
solution promises no material advantage — nothing
that would make a brave man happier, or a coward
braver, or a sensualist more spiritual. On the con-
trary there are high considerations under which it
seems better that the Secret should still be kept.
The inevitable stales, while Doubt and Hope are sis-
ters. Not for aught that philosophy might promise
could Tithonus have been reconciled to an immortal-
ity which he could not escape.

We shall find that the problem of moral re-
sponsibility, as divided between human and divine


184 PLURIVERSE

authority, was promptly solved by the Master in
pragmatical terms. When decision was required of
him, as to submission whether to Caesar or to God,
he referred instantly to the emblem of the power
prevailing in the immediate field of observation:
"Render unto Caesar of the things which are Caesar's,
and unto God of the things which are God's."

Of all the world's religious teachers, Jesus was
the most explicit and persistent in the denial of man's
originality, and especially of his self-relation. He
spoke for the race when he said, "Of myself I can do
nothing." And however he dwelt upon "work" to
be -done, its performance or its neglect was theo-
logically construed as rather an evidence of divine
guidance than as a ground for either reward or
punishment by the omnipotent Ruler.

Despite all the talk of free wiU and personal re-
sponsibility, modern culture, especially since Gall
and Spurzheim, frankly and even kindly condones
the wide diiference in human organization and tem-
perament. Certain virtues, each to a certain degree,
the customs and needs of society and the dictates of
common sense will still insist upon; but "for the
most part" a man is now held as little responsible
for his courage or his constancy as he is for his
mental endowment. Those tough old Romans did
in law hold the witness of an action as participant
in its results; and in our own courts, not infre-
quently in cases of assault, a spectator has been
adjudged as particepg criminis; the officer is en-
titled to call upon any bystander for assistance;
but in case of default on the part of a weak or timid
man the jury is wisely permitted to consider and


JESUS AND FREE WILL 185

determine the personal equation: thej are assumed
to know how it is themselves.

For the philosopher, God is a logical point or
postulate, a concerted position, intended to locate
or focalize his main problem. For him aU questions
of responsibility and personality fuse into the logi-
cal possibilities of such an assumed position. To
popular thought, which at first steadies its vision
upon some fancied fetich of a halo and bust, He is
mainly defined by negations: He must be, but of
course, upon reflection, He cannot be this, and He
cannot be that — until finally He cannot be any-
thing ; but in any case He must be "infinite" — a
portentous adjective, which literally dissipates all
conception, eviscerates all content, and means
nothing. No man hath seen Him at any time; thou
canst not find out Him to perfection; nor is He to
any save as the Logos shall reveal Him.

Said Fichte: "I will not attempt that which the
imperfection of my finite nature forestalls, and which
would be useless to me; how Thou art, I may not
know. Thou knowest and wiliest and workest, omni-
present to finite reason; but as I now and always
must conceive of being. Thou art not."

It is not strange that this bold expression cost
him his professorial chair.

Freedom, attributed as a quality or property of
anything, should infer the thing's exemption from
any influence or bearing or determination from either
its environment or its content. Any creature must,
as such, have a natural content, and if active it
will be a secondary cause; but so far as it is cause
at all it has a given quality, and exemption from


186 PLURIVERSE

this quality would imply the nullification of its being.
The hypothesis of anything being free of or unde-
termined in its own content, or as an actor indepen-
dent of its creator, or as responsible to its creator
in the very instance of its creation as an activity,
should require at least a very difficult defense.

The popular notion of "free will" is that one is
responsibly free when he can "do as he has a
mind to." The State is not immediately (however
ultimately) considering his originality, in declaring
his responsibility to its own policy ; in a round-about
way it does wisely assume the mental cultivation of
the citizen; but the immediate congenital quality of
the creature, from the viewpoint of its puted Creator,
can hardly involve responsibility.

The psychology of this predicament has been
rather vaguely exploited. Doubtless there was al-
ways recognized (or at least since our "civilization")
something determined in the natural make-up of
the individual man. Socrates, for example, argued
earnestly that virtue cannot be taught. But it
was mainly subsequent to the observations of Gall
and Spurzheim that physiological structure, either
brute or human, was held to determine, in all but
very exceptional cases, the mental and moral quali-
ties of the individual. Ethical and religious ob-
jections have of course been raised against the
theory, and Emerson even resented it, but intelligent
people generally now admit its main contentions so
far, that the frontal brain is efficient intellectually,
the top and back brain morally, and the side brain
more or less aesthetically. This is so taught in the
common schools.


JESUS AND FREE WILL 187

Various mechanical bearings and compensations
seem to rationalize the consciousness and disposition
as naturally resulting from peculiarities of physical
organization. In Scripture, the creature thinks "as
he is," and as if necessarily so. The long fibre of
the hound must render him sensitive, apprehensive
and timid, while the compact bull-dog, with his teeth
in advance of his nose, threatening execution before
judgment, is sudden and quick in quarrel.

Such considerations should repress the flippancy
of this "having a mind to." Mind is not so cheap
a commodity; and the will is not quite amenable to
one's ideals. No doubt, one could have the courage
of Ney or Decatur if he had a mind to, in the right
sense; or he might go up as climbs the steeple- j ack,
and standing on the cross, wave his cap to the
thrilled and apprehensive crowd below; but the
average man in the same position would feel his hair
turning gray at the roots ; his heart would fail him,
and inconsequent and dangerous fancies might come
to him.

The very place puts toys of desperation.
Without more motive, into every brain
That looks so many fathoms to the sea
And hears it roar.

Even our common honesty is amenable to the
clearness of our natural memory and perceptions.
Plato suggested the difference of the rogue and the
honest man as largely mathematical.

The freedom of will and consciousness requires a
delicate appreciation when it involves relations of
the divine and the human, and especially, for us


188 PLURIVERSE

here, as implicating the doctrines of Jesus concern-
ing it, for these aiford little of favorable counte-
nance to the current notions of free will, especially
as affecting human responsibility and retribution.
He was the first to so emphasize the divine guidance
and government as to invest it in the business and
bosom of humanity as a working thought of daily
life, for its own sake and hereafter.

There seems to have been but little really scien-
tific reflection upon the intimate relation of our puted
originality to the Power that is our ultimate refer-
ence, or upon the infrequency of our consideration
of it, although for the greater part of the time we
are involuntarily using it, and are inspired and
guided by it. From the causative viewpoint one
hardly need pay any attention to himself, whether
thinking or acting. One should be curious, even if
not astonished, that, while he is giving atteiltion to
the fact, he draws his every breath voluntarily, yet
his breathing goes on quite as regularly "of itself" ;
and also the fact that his thoughts and words come
from sources of which he knows nothing, and whose
current he can only with special effort control, and
whose persistence he would often repress. Give the
clever thinker a patent for a device that would stop
one's thinking, he need never again work for wages.

Experts have differed almost diametrically upon
the wonderful duplexity of what we call personality,
especially as involving divine and human nature.
To the egoist, personality is original: "the highest,
steepest thought," said Hegel. Emerson would look
no higher than the canon of Kant — the cultured
consciousness — and to this our personality is a


JESUS AND FREE WILL 189

wavering and inconstant attachment, never quite
identical with our more essraitial being. Indeed he
would regard "genius" as subservience of the former
to the latter, as " the virtue of a pipe is to be hollow
and smooth." "We aspire and look up," said he, "and
put ourselves in an attitude of attention, but from
some alien energy the visions come." Even so held
St. Augustine, Goethe, and many others. The
thoughtful man, even with no regard to the consola-
tion of Jesus, must find in this reflection the most inti-
mate solace for his follies and his sins. It is his best
and least costly reverence, the belief that he is the
instriunent of a higher power.

The adjustment of the citizen's inspired action to
the requirements of national and social government
was a problem which more than transiently con-
cerned Jesus. He recognized a discrepancy in civil
duties being excused by loyalty to divine commands.
Though it needs be, in the divine scheme, that
offences come, the state criminal shall suffer punish-
ment — shall render unto Csesar the tribute due to
his function and vocation.

The Pharisees demanded of Him a reconciliation
of his gospel of mercy with the punishment exacted
by the Mosaic law. The case must bear citation :

"Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives. And early
in the morning he came again into the temple, and
all the people came unto him, and he sat down and
taught them.

"And the scribes and pharisees brought unto him
a woman taken in adultery; and when they set her
in the midst they say unto him, 'Master, this woman
was taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses


190 PLURIVERSE

in the law commanded us that such should be stoned ;
but what sayest thou?'

"This they said tempting him, that they might
have, to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and
with his finger wrote in the dust. So when they con-
tinued asking him he lifted up himself and said
unto them, 'He that is without sin among you, let
him first cast a stone at her.' And again he stooped
down and wrote in the dust.

"And they who heard it, being convicted in their
o\en conscience, went out one by one, beginning at
the eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus was lef/
alone, with the woman standing in the midst.

"When Jesus had lifted up himself, and saw none
but the woman, he said unto her, 'Woman, where are
those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?'

"She said, 'No man, lord.'

"And Jesus said unto her, 'Neither do I condemn
thee. Go, and sin no more.' "

(How far this seems from the "jealous God, visit-
ing the iniquities of the fathers upon their children
even unto the third and fourth generation!")

It is theoretically impossible to pervert this epi-
sode to an exceptional case. The sin charged, the
overt commission, the concurrent testimony, the un-
questioned law and the prevalent custom, aU confirm
it as a recognition of the divine viewpoint, as to the
responsibility of the creature to the Creator whose
work shall be manifest in him. The pertinence and
motive of the legend can obtain only in the divine
purpose of the gospel to relieve the human conscience
of any responsibility to the inspiring Power whose
behest it powerlessly fulfills. There can be no vi-


JESUS AND FREE WILL 191

carious or compensatory forgiveness of moral derelic-
tion; the secondary orginality which burdens the
human conscience must be relieved, not by any sacri-
ficial readjustment, but by a wiping out of the record
in the act of the divine Disposer as taking the bur-
den and its responsibility upon himself, and setting
the "sinner" free. [See Eucken to this same effect.]

Our discussion should have thrown some light
upon the recalcitrance of Jesus against Jewish law
in this instance. Our theologians, in their "plan of
salvation," seem to still regard him as a sacrifice for
the remission of our sins, not considering that only
a truth can relieve the spirit. The central truth
of the gospel of Jesus is that of himself the creature
can do nothing; that God is rather a father than
a governor, but more than either he is for his
own purpose the inner and inspiring life and light,
without which not even a sparrow falls to the
ground.

However the creature may seem to himself original
and responsible, the true light shows his power to be
but secondary from the divine viewpoint, and the re-
mission of his sins is possible only in the truth that
the Divine assumes responsibility for them. Let one
know that the follies he has committed are circum-
stantial, and not congenital in his proper stuff —
that his shame and remorse are not ultimately attrib-
utable to him, but rather to the divine purpose, his
conscience may drop the ball and chain ; for the truth
and the light will have set him free.

That Jesus conceived of himself as historically and
generically singular in the fact of this annunciation,
its previous repression may well have persuaded him.


192 PLURIVERSE

The personal psychology of the Master is as obscure
as was his social environment. The Grecian culture
of 400 years before must still have glimmered
through the regime of the Cassars. Pontius Pilate
was obviously a philosophical scholar. His chance
question, partly to the crude Judean agitators,
"What is truth?" is, barring the proem to the
gospel according to St. John, the most important
metaphysical expression in the New Testament ; and
the announcement of Jesus, "I am the truth," is the
only plausible retort to that unanswerable question
— since really truth is impossible. As to what Jesus
knew of the world's inconsequent philosophy, no ex-
acting occasion appears to have shown. His re-
sponses were ever timely and pragmatical, as fitted
to his audience, A discussion with Pilate would have
been in bad form, A logomachist or a professional
sophist might well have regarded this as an eminently
fortunate opportunity; but a fine genius, possibly
entranced by an auto-suggestion of uniquity, could
but stand for and live the only feasible answer to
the Roman's fling.

Our more immediate interest in Jesus lies in the
metaphysical weight of his emphasis upon what we
regard as the philosophical fact, that personality
can bear but a part of the burden of explanation.
That the surd should be absolute is an extravagant
conjecture. Idealism will have at least this admis-
sion, that the Mystery, even as ultimate, must be
known to be such: there shall be knowledge or
nothing. The problem was stiU for him, as it must
be for all thought, that however humbly he denied
himself, however utterly he submerged his original-


JESUS AND FREE WILL 193

ity in him in whom we live and move and have our
being — a relation transcendently more intimate
than that of father and son, or of principal and
agent, or of ruler and subject — he had yet to con-
strue, in his homiletic, a duplexity in his ostensible
unity with the Father. The dialectic controversy
which the succeeding ages have realized was immi-
nent and unavoidable. But we should observe, as of
the utmost philosophical importance, that in his
treatment of this occult relation he credited to hu-
manity no more of "free agency" than a personal
individuality as such must socially infer. The
Cassar is enthroned in the material world; and life,
with all the antagonism and self-seeking by which
vitality accrues, is for divine purposes divided among
the many ; but the private aspiration of the individ-
ual, and his prayer to the paternal Power which
shall exploit these individual antagonisms, recognizes
as little as possible of the separateness between the
secular magistrate and the subject of his official
jurisdiction. The Lord's Prayer at once pleads
and deprecates the fact that it is addressed to the
very source of its own inspiration — to that which
both prompts and enables the petitioner "to
will and to do." It voices the helpless anxiety
of a supplicant to the Power which alone can
furnish the disposition which it demands, yet to
which it acknowledges indisputable responsibility.
Our interest in the complication is not so much in
the sinner's psychological illusion of freedom as it
is in the philosophical testimony against his original
competence.

Matthew vi, 9: "Your Father knoweth what


194 PLURIVERSE

things ye have need of before ye ask him. After this
manner therefore pray ye :

"Our Father, who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy
name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive our debts, as we forgive our
debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but de-
liver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, and the
power, and the glory, for ever. Amen."

There can be no consistent interpretation of these
sentences other than that all power and disposition
are of God. How utterly impertinent were the ad-
juration, "Lead us not into temptation," in any
other understanding than that all guidance and in-
spiration are of God! — Yet we have it from St.
James : "Let no many say, when he is tempted, 'I am
tempted of God' ; for God is not tempted of any,
neither tempteth he any man." This protest, how-
ever, came from the vulgar consciousness, "under
the law," and lacked the refinement and second-sight
of Jesus and St. John. The New Testament will go
for nothing if such contradictions shall be allowed to
outface its esoteric spirit.

This doctrine of St. James was the voice of that
"categorical imperative" for which Kant, in the in-
terest of Prussian orthodoxy, imperiled his philoso-
phical reputation, refusing to consider that all ex-
altation of the power of the creature implies an
equal derogation from that of the Creator — a
dividing of the house against itself.

The title of Jesus, whether as the Son of Man or
the Son of God, was questioned as exhaustively dur-
ing his lifetime as it has been since. He read from


JESUS AND FREE WILL 196

*'the law" an ascription of godship that left it quite
other than unique; "to some gave he power to be-^
come sons of God"; and our advanced criticism has
been quick to quote the precedent, and has so plaus-
ibly barricaded the human position, made it so dan-
gerous, aesthetically, to attack it, that its discussion
is socially regarded as bad form ; we hear, occasion-
ally, that "religion out of church is sacrilege." In
fact the policy of the Church has always deprecated
even the possession of the Scriptures in unclerical
hands.

Protestant faith, for all its monism, is embar-
rassed by a too duU appreciation of the unique ele-
ment in nature. There needs no more than common
sense to admit that no one miracle should be more
astounding than another, nor than the whole. A
man rising from the grave, having a body already,
is not half the miracle of a bird perfecting in an
egg, with only an impersonal heat to promote its
development. That a man was born of a virgin
is as nothing to the fact that one was ever born at
all. This wonder, like every other accomplishment
of nature, is but a question of historical evidence,
in which every incident, microscopically criticised,
is in some particular unique. The miracle of a
local fact fades in its cosmic background. One may
readily class himself as a cad and a menial by truc-
ulently presuming upon Nature as intending con-
sistency and law. The cataclysms of history, the
wandering aerolites which have struck us, the frus-
trations of promise and the impossibility of final
purpose, all give warning that our lesson is not of
law, but rather of exceptionality and unreason. On


196 PLURIVERSE

the other hand, the wildest abnormity may recur in
its cycle, and prove no miracle as such.

There appears a confusion in ecclesiastic affairs,
obviously owing to neglect of the duplex vocation of
Jesus as he apprehended and explicitly declared it.
While he, as a Jew, loyally accepted the Messianic
succession, and announced that jot nor tittle of the
law should fail until all should be fulfilled — that is
to say that he by vicarious sacrifice should still sat-
isfy the law of retribution as it was written of old —
he categorically proclaimed a new dispensation, of
love rather than of vengeance, wherein, by the divine
resumption of all efficiency, and the renunciation of
all originality on the part of the creature, the con-
viction of sin should be alleviated, Jitnd its burden of
responsibility borne by the Creator. Our only
philosophical interest in the topic is, that Jesus, for
himself and for all men, renounced originality and
free will, in favor of divine omnipotence.

That Jesus was no philosopher — meaning that
his insight was never blurred by dialectic problems
— is of course, from our viewpoint, decisively in his
favor; but that he was the world's most profound
psychologist, as having the clearest intuition of the
demands of honor and conscience, shall unquestion-
ably appear. For who that has felt the horror of
remorse for cruelty to another could assuage the
pangs of conscience with the thought that another,
more generous than himself, was suffering a penalty
that was justly his own desert? "Whip me, ye
devils !" cried the despairing Moor, as he gazed upon
the evidence of his vengeance and superior strength.
Could any vicarious suffering have relieved him, who


JESUS AND FEEE WILL 197

truly "was great of heart"? Not thus is the for-
giveness of sin. But if one could have assured him
that he had been possessed, that he had been de-
mented and overborne, "ensnared soul and body" —
that truly of himself he could have done nothing —
he might at length have been free, in the liberty of
the Gospel. Not by expense of the blood of bulls
and goats is salvation, nor mainly by his own blood
itself — "my word shall make you free." The sin
is no longer "imputed" to the creature.

It is not to be denied, however — and herein is one
secret of the popular success of Christianity — that
the satisfaction of the "law," the assurance that
"Christ has died for you," that his blood cleanseth
from all iniquity, is a postulate more appealing to
the average sinner thain is the metaphysical assur-
ance of an illusive sense of responsibility. Prag-
matic salvation is promoted by vicarious substitu-
tion, and is not over-critical as to method, so long
as it gets results. The advice is not infrequent
among men of approved sagacity and established
credit: "Why trouble yourself over these insoluble
however important problems? Better keep with the
procession, join in the ordinances, take the safe side,
and countenance respectability. The yoke is easy,
and the burden is light." It is a natural conse-
quence of this pragmatic objectivity that a thousand
worshipers shall kneel to Jesus as the Son of God,
where one may bow to the sublime wisdom and good-
ness of the Son of Man; but an appeal to the Court
of Common Pleas would show that one judicious
critic should outweigh a whole theatre of others,
and that, freed from superstition and professional


198 PLURIVERSE

exploitation, Christianity is the religion of the
scholar and the gentleman — neither more nor less
for the twentieth century.

Accustomed as we have become to the Immanuel
idea — the concept of "God with us," as meaning
the homogeneity of intelligence — we can but faintly
realize the weight of its obsession upon the conscious-
ness which first discovered, or at least the personal-
ity that first rationally entertained it. Alone
among men whose civic necessities emphasized their
responsibility to an objective environment, and who
had no notion of an inner and subjective connection
with the divine intelligence or power, he could hardly
avoid the conviction of singularity in his nature and
his mission. More portentously, if not even more
formidably, his distinction involved the Highest ; and
we get the hint that his brooding upon it grew into a
temptation to thaumaturgicaUy test its significance:
Could he convert stones into bread? Could he cast
himself from a precipice in safety? Could he go
forth into the world and achieve wealth and political
power? Whatever confidence the experiment did in-
spire was held in check by his recognition of an
ancient Scripture : "Thou shalt not tempt the Lord,
thy God." This quotation obviously was not wholly
a retort upon the devil, but also a reminder to him-
self.

The astute critic wiU date from this temptation
and its lesson, whatever that lesson may have been,
the seemingly uncalled for and otherwise luiaccount-
able persistence of Jesus in designating himself as
the Son of Man, and in even homiletically defending
that title as in itself a sufficient renouncement of that


JESUS AND FREE WILL 199

other title, the "Son of God," whose virtual syno-
nymity he could not trust his enemies to understand/
Had he deigned to renounce his own singulartiy and
join the rabble as one wholly of their caste, he might
possibly have escaped as effectually as did his dis-
ciples, of whom not one appeared at his trial. Evi-
dently he had no faith in the ability of his adherents
to treat the topic of divine Sonship ; and on several
occasions he admonished them to "teU no man this
thing."

There appears in the record a special anxiety of
Jesus to forestall any accusation of his presumption
to the Highest, however difficult his doctrine might
render a due discrimination between the titles of Son
of Man and Son of God. Obviously in the mind of
Jesus there was for him no difference between them,
whether or not all men, at their best, might be
equally entitled; but the extraordinary significance
then first apparent in his claim was a constant em-
barrassment to his discourse, seeming to demand of
him a habitual classification of himself with his fel-
low-men. I count in the New Testament seventy-
two instances of his adoption of the designedly
apologetic or deprecative title of the Son of Man,
while in but two instances, and these of very ques-
tionable literary probability, is he quoted as identi-
fying himself generically and exceptionally with
God. On the other hand, he reproached his disciples
continually, in that only a lack of faith deferred
their accomplishment from equality with his own.

1 This consideration is strongly urged in "Christ's Secret
Doctrine," an essay by H. S. Mories, published by James
McKelvie and Sons, Ltd., Greenock, Scotland.


200 PLURIVERSE

It was the profunditj of his doctrine, not the over-
presumption of his individual supremacy, that cost
him his life.

This shall give no offense, our saying that Jesus
was not a philosopher. His sense of explanation
had attained only to God. The humblest Galilean
had as much theology as had he, and could not
have learned from him that he had traced the logi-
cal mystery to any higher source than the child
finds in the father by a faith which forestalls all
speculation — the same faith which Fichte came to
substitute for impossible knowledge.

And who but he has left in the human record any
food for the imagination that could picture the
divine man? Who but he, in all history, has
divinely posed, or said unto his fellow-man, face to
face. Look into my eyes and see all of God that shall
be seen at any time?

"Philip saith unto him. Lord, show us the Father,
and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith unto him, Have I
been so long with you, and yet hast thou not known
me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father; and how sayest thou then. Show us the
Father? Believest thou not that I am in the Father,
and the Father in me? The words that I speak unto
thee I speak not of myself; but the Father that in-
hereth in me, he doeth the works. Believe me, that
I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else
believe me for the very works' sake. Verily, verily
I say unto you. He that believeth in me, the works
that I do shall he do also; and greater works than
these shall he do, because I go unto my Father."

Surely here spoke the Son of Man, with no un-


JESUS AND FREE WILL 201

due pretension above his fellow-man, if so be the
latter would rise to a right faith in their common
nature.

Obviously there should be a reopening of this
cause — the charge of blasphemy as against Jesus,
accused of posing as "the Son of God" — and a
modern reporter should be assigned upon the case.
It is true that the testimony was technically incon-
sistent, but an unbiased judge should perceive in
the discrepancy of the evidence a warrant against
any coUusion or conspiracy of the witnesses, and
find rather an assurance of occurrence so extraor-
dinary as to provoke different intepretations, as
well as to impart even discordant impressions. Not
in all history have complications so intricate, in-
volving property interests so extensive, come to
rest in mere possession upon such unsettled premises,
and under such conflicting titles. These material
properties and perquisites are likely to hold the
churches asunder long after the average culture shall
have accepted Jesus under his own oft-reiterated
title of the Son of Man — par excellence.

It seems long until the race can adjust the per-
sonal equation, rather by lifting up its own dignity
than by dragging Jesus down.

Finally — and frankly and modernly — we have
no immediate vocation to either account for or con-
ciliate the popular prestige of Christianity. For
people of mature convictions certain of its manifest
discrepancies are swiftly righting of themselves, in
ways which a boastful approval would only check
and embarrass. It may be safely granted to "mod-
ernity" that the personality of Jesus is liable to ex-


202 PLURIVERSE

aggeration through the mist of distance and the
crudity of his record, and that, born into our science
and culture, his life and doctrine would have been
differently interpreted — and it was false interpre-
tation that destroyed him. But as against all skep-
ticism of the unique in history, and in scientific and
secular assurance of the faith in him that is so
largely and devoutly cherished, we must hold it as
not a syllable too much to say — and we challenge
philosophical contention of the saying — that there
is no other name given under heaven among men, as
of one through whose truth the race can either for-
give or be forgiven for its sins, than the name of
Jesus of Nazareth.

Said Goethe: "Life, no less than scientific investi-
gation, is confined within impassable barriers. All
man's activity rests upon a given natural order ; his
work can only succeed when it strikes out in the
direction prescribed by nature; it becomes empty
and artificial if it tries to sever its connections or
to act in opposition to nature. 'Let man turn
whither he will, undertake no matter what; he will
ever come back again to that path which nature has
mapped out for him.' "

Said Emerson: "The ardors of piety agree at
last with the coldest skepticism, that nothing is of
us or our works — that all is of God. Nature will
not spare us the smallest leaf of laurel. All writ-
ing comes by the grace of God, and all doing and
having. I woidd gladly be moral, and keep due metes
and bounds, which I dearly love, and allow the most
to the will of man ; but I have set my heart on hon-
esty in this chapter, and I can see nothing at last, in


JESUS AND FREE WILL 203

success or failure, than more or less of vital force
supplied by the Eternal."

Said Spinoza: "There is no bad, to God . . .
to him there is no 'free wiU.' "

Said St. Augustine: "What is done by thee is
done by God working in thee." . . . "Whatever
he does or leaves undone, man can alter nothing ; his
role in life is minutely prescribed for him."

Said Eucken: *'He who will not begin with won-
der and admiration will never find entrance to the
Holy of Holies. For his discoveries, his syntheses,
his happy inspirations, the artist has to thank not
his own reflections but a Supreme Power."

Said Eckhart: "All error and depravity come
from God's creatures presuming to be or do some-
thing on their own account."

If we aspired to an apothegm, it would be that
freedom, originality, and reason as in equation with
the Mystery, shall be the last hopes of mortal ex-
planation.


CHAPTER IX
THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION

I HAVE made the preceding digest of current phil-
osophy in the hope of familiarizing its mental
spectres, and of authenticating if not justifying
the halting discomfiture of even the most cultured
patients of the anaesthetic revelation. If I have
rightly indicated the obstacles and pitfalls which
disrupt the course of satisfactory explanation, and
have suflSciently emphasized the confessed failures
of philosophical endeavor, the reader should foresee
that the seemingly promising rubric, "Anaesthetic
Revelation," may forecast rather unutterable Mys-
tery than satisfaction, although our better insight
of the dialectic shifts, and the more familiar use of
the logical conventions, may clear, to some extent,
the mental area in which the Mystery is encountered.

Our hope is not so much to philosophize the Mys-
tery as it is to signalize in it an unequivocal impasse
whose obstruction can be neither obviated nor de-
fined — if the confusion of philosophy may attest
the fact.

The illumination, or the obsession, which has
prompted this treatise, will have rarely arrested the
attention of the boor or the bigot ; but for the world-
wise it will determine as his ultimate and only pos-
sible insight of the genius of being and the secret of

204


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION 205

the world. Any essay upon the anaesthetic (or
presumptively any other) revelation, as proposing
a detail of what it is or is like, is immediately baffled
by the consideration that its topic is and must be
unique. It has no class, no relation to any com-
parable fact or theory whatsoever. Its best remem-
bered impression is the sense of imitiation, as into the
immemorial, the inevitable, the time-out-of-mind, the
something of fate or destiny which, in even justice,
at least for once every sane consciousness should
realize.

All analogies anticipate the concession that the
unique cannot be articulate. Nor does the revela-
tion require for its reception, however it may for its
entertainment, the thoughts of language, wherein
man excels the beasts of the field. One may be ad-
vised of a handicap which the lack of conventional
language imposes upon a dumb intelligence, poten-
tially as apprehensive, possibly, as his own.

An English dictionary, with its 2,000 pages, car-
ries some 350,000 diiferent words, of whose meanings
the average citizen may know one tenth. Our
Indians, of the time of Columbus, may have had 200
words, among which were a few adjectives, but no
sign of an abstraction. Conceive then the utter
latency — saying nothing of the potentiality — in
the Indian mind, of such meanings as memory, ob-
jectivity, veracity, heredity, and ten thousand of the
like, which were wholly beyond his faculty of expres-
sion, or even of focalization in his attention.
Under strong emotion he could merely contort his
habitually immobile visage, or gesticulate in rude
imitation, while his heart might be voluble of an


206 PLURIVERSE

inarticulate and helpless meaning. He could not
know, he could not connectedly think, he could not
be said to feel the meanings which only culture could
educate up to sane and conventional expression, even
to himself. Yet the basis for all this exploitation
was within him, his birthright as a monad and a
soul ; he was not a stock or a stone, but counted as
one in the spirit world, where even the beast is open
to some revelation which in the instant shall carry,
however cryptically, the hint of initiation — the hint
that Now You Know.

I have wondered at psychology and "natural his-
tory," that they have nowhere noticed or identified
what has been long known to me as the voice of the
blood. They should have heeded the injunction, to
"search the Scriptures." For centuries ago, when
there were cattle upon a thousand hills, and the
patriarchs dwelt in tents, and had no abattoirs for
slaughtering purposes, they bled the stalled ox and
the fatted calf in the open field, and the blood sank
directly into the grassy ground, where it must have
frequently occasioned the metaphysical phenomenon
which I have mentioned as the voice of the blood, so
impressively quoted in Genesis, in these words :

"And the Lord said unto Cain, Where is Abel, thy
brother? And he said, I know not. Am I my
brother's keeper? — And he said, What hast thou
done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto
me from the ground."

The dwellers in cities may live and die with no
pathetic suggestion from this incident, they regard-
ing its language as merely poetic and symbolical;
but it undoubtedly grew out of a peculiarity well


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION 207

known to every plainsman, and which shall have been
observed, however carelessly, by many a farmer's
boy — a peculiarity of the following character :
Where the blood of an animal has been freshly shed
upon the ground — particularly, in my own ex-
perience, the blood of an ox, or of a cow or a calf —
any other member of the herd passing over the fatal
spot will be arrested and entranced, seemingly by
some exhalation from the vital fluid. The animal
stares, with a rapt and distracted expression, moan-
ing and pawing the ground, as if in fierce remon-
strance, though apparently "more in sorrow than in
&nger." This abstraction may last for several sec-
onds ; but any noise or intrusion which would ordi-
narily call attention wiU break the spell, which, as
in the case of "bearing pain," seems to be instantly
gone and forgotten. Having had largely to do with
flocks and herds I have witnessed this wonder many
times; but after all our Psychical Research I have
never seen it in secular print.

I cannot make less of this phenomenon than a
revelation, addressed to some atavism of the bovine
race, wherein it is as susceptible of the genius of
beilig as man himself has proved it. Of what cata-
clysm in the history of the creature's species may not
this trance afford a reminiscence. The animal has
no formal or consecutive thought, probably, but
neither, so far as I have gathered, has the anaesthetic
patient, save as an informal memory that baffles rec-
ollection.

One may ponder long the manifest elements of
animal mentality, as transcending the passive recep-
tivity of native instinct — considering not only how


208 PLURIVERSE

much the dumb creatures may be taught, but how
many assthetic traits they show, in the vanity of
play and imitation and rivalry, and how deep and
lasting their affections are — before he will attain
any clear conception of the metaphysical possibili-
ties of this animal trance, or reverie, or illumination,
or whatever it may be called — learn, for instance,
if it has any imagination, any hint of palingenesis,
or metempsychosis, or any scihtil of a past, or of
being itself, or fate. Very probably it is the crea-
ture's supreme moment, his nearest relation to what
we think of as spiritual life. And it is so pro-
nounced, so wholly unique in scientific metaphysics,
that I have come to regard it as the monad's most
palpable connection with an unseen world.

There are various other instinctual obsessions or
possessions which lend a superstitious atmosphere
to animal life. A cow, when she leaves her calf
resting while she roams in pursuit of her own forage,
seems to have left a spell upon it that holds it mo-
tionless against her return. It will not leave the
spot save for some extraordinary and threatening
intrusion; but if really driven by some compelling
apprehension to escape, it will run as for its life, and
recall the mother with frantic and pitiful appeals.

So a brooding hen, however timid has been her
previous habits, is so inspired by a courage and
loyalty to her eggs — which must not be allowed to
cool — that she will not budge for man or beast.
We may easily generalize these instances as provi-
sions of nature, and so forth, but they have a mys-
tical appeal.

There is another supreme instant, often noticed


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 209

of the dying patient — a stare of seeming recogni-
tion, as of some wonderful import, just before but
distinctly not inclusive with the "setting" of the
eyes. We should consent that the meanest creature
ever favored with this miracle of consciousness, this
flower of all evolution, may well be given, at least for
once, a glimpse of history, or some abnormal reality.

And here, again, the most astute and critical may
need warning, against any skeptical and peremp-
tory demand upon the mystic, as to what he knows
or sees. This what gives the skeptic away, in his
naive priBSuraption that the world-mystery can be of
a class, and so comparable and definable. But the
basis of all metaphysical insight is the primary fact
that being is unique. Until one can identify this
logical necessity he is not of the illuminati, although
he may be wearing the broadest horns of the herd.
He should see that this import cannot be writ on any
scroll; he must have the background of its mean-
ing in himself — if indeed he ever may, after our
hopeless account, or discount of self-relation.
Nevertheless, although we may not profane the one
mystery as a topic among others, it seems possible
that we should rise to it at our best, and learn that
it is a mystery only because we are living on a plane
below our best, while its higher sanity is still within
the homogeneity of an intelligence which transcends
the portals of formal enunciation.

It were manifestly absurd, claiming a "revelation"
not amenable to intelligence; but if we may under-
stand Socrates' proof that Meno's slave had latent
geometry in his mind, or believe that a proud and
sulky Indian may be chafing under the pressure of


210 PLURIVERSE

abstractions so easily connoted by us, the reader may
at least "believe in" a revelation unique and manage-
able, and withheld from popular appreciation not
only, but instantly unthinkable by the most pi'o-
found of mental experts. The latter will claim,
under his modern lights (which reveal below the
"threshold") that he may live the secret although he
has not yet language in which to formulate it, and so
hold the world to the rule of reason, pound for pound.
But it is peculiarly this flippant and chipper ration-
ality and "matter of course" that the revelation em-
barrasses and disconcerts. Here is no static ac-
countable equation, but rather a constant excess,
and a going on simply because it is going on, in
which the natural endeavor to account for itself
proves to be of a piece with and continuing the same
stuif that it is meant to account for. Strong in the
revelation is this sense of an inevitable going on **be-
cause of" the curious interest in the fact that it is
going on, helplessly and fatedly going on, with a
sense of immemorial initiation into the truth that
this is the inevitable and eternal world-condition,
and however piquant or unique, as what inevitably
and of course must be, and ever must have been.
There never was a time that did not recognize the
presumption of time and the push of its own neces-
sity, and also that any question of its motive was
itself a sufficient reason at once for its continuance
and for its precedence, but with no relation to a
beginning. This is what stultifies the argument for
cause: that there is no possibility of a beginning,
and therefore no place in which to locate a cause.
Above all, it is a revelation of the one truth that


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION 211

is supremely "worth while," but baffled of content by
the too-evident fatuity of turning upon itself to
achieve a self-relation — a real self-consciousness,
in which concept and percept should unite in a
whole cognition.

It is fairly presumptive that thought, newly
wrought to its highest tension, should revert with
curious interest to its remembered experience (or
its self) and be baffled in its attempts at instant
self-relation, while realizing at the same time that
the effort of understanding is itself continuing (and
in a certain sense accounting for) the very activity
which arrests its attention — affording a presump-
tion from the past as enforcing time's continuance.

With this sense of an effort of the soul to turn
upon itself for an escaping and unachievable self-
knowledge, the anaesthetic insight attests the only
presumable or possible first principle of thought
and being, namely, fact, philosophy, explanation,
"cause" — all this curiosity and discontent, is to
get before the fact, to surround and comprehend the
fact of consciousness ; and it discovers at last that,
in a process of factual thought beginning is impos-
sible, and hence fact is a foregone conclusion, or
necessary presumption ; and since here is everywhere,
comprehension is inconceivable save as in this vain
and continuous obsession of self-relation, which keeps
the Hound of Heaven on his own trail.

"The wonderful thing is fact" said Carlyle. The
gritty Scot was very near to the mystic sanity.
And all through German philosophy crops out this
desperate and illogical finality of fact, in such say-
ings as "it is because it is" — using the given fact


212 PLURIVERSE

of knowledge (or of process) as the "cause" of it,
and as objectively before it — whereas (as I have
laboriously sought to show) the cause is subjectively
and miraculously given as the first of facts, and fact
(not cause) is the prime reality of being as experi-
ence — the given percept which must ground all con-
ception.

Now if this necessary analysis were all — this
secular Kantian thought, which thousands of intro-
spective people have revolved as the puzzle and crux
of philosophy — our "revelation" would be none
such! But the immemorial atavism, the sense of
initiation, the voice of the blood, the unique assur-
ance that it is a revelation of the historical and
inevitable and the time out of mind — all this ad-
monishes the philosophical parasite that he is not
here as a cosmopolitan critic of worlds, with a vo-
cation to put this being in its class, but rather that
there is but this; and that, for his once and all,
he knows reality. It was a strong saying of
William James: "He that hath ears to hear, let
him hear: for me the living sense of reality comes
only in the artificial-mystic state of mind."

It should be obvious that a generalization of such
an experience — involving as it must all the ancil-
lary shadings of the present tense — would have to
be told in tentative and provisional and poetical
rather than factual terms. Continuous but revert-
ing, sure and yet questioning, at once real, reminis-
cent and expectant, the genius of it might well
regard sardonically any attempt at its factual ex-
pression.

We are not to infer that the status of the world


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 213

is necessarily weakened or undermined by this inter-
pretation of it as a mystery to us and our philoso-
phy. The spirit still transcends. There is no
finite consciousness or conviction that should fore-
stall the cosmic afterthought of our parasital and
secondary nature, or authoritatively declare the surd
ultimate in itself. We might say that for one as
great as the world the world could be reasonable;
but if we have any faith in our own judgment there
is no such one, nor any such world. The cosmos
itself is no unit, but rather an egotistic fetich, which
the multiverse shall dissipate and overwhelm.

A proof that the revelation is homogeneous with
intelligence at its best tension is, that it rarely fol-
lows recovery from the major operations which have
required prolonged anaesthesia, and which have
doubtless benumbed the reflective faculties of the
patient. It attends rather the "coming to" from
a trance of but a few moments' duration, when
presumably the mental faculties are still fresh, al-
though under abnormal exhilaration. It is of com-
mon knowledge that we think faster and more com-
prehensively at some times than we do or can at
others.

That eminent psychologist, William James, was
specially insistent — particularly in view of the
notorious trances of Lord Tennyson — that any
revelation, however occult, must still be sane, and
that there can be no other than the homogeneous
intelligence. While he was apt enough to agree that
knowledge is iinaccountable and insoluble, he could
not consent that a really false knowledge might be
imposed upon intelligence as such; he "felt" that


214 PLURIVERSE

hypothesis to be contradictory, however deeply the
"unknown root" might be buried.

Of course, f eehng can be no arbiter of contradic-
tion; and "the prime fact of knowledge," as Prof,
Ladd caUs it, cannot be proved or authenticated;
we cannot double-think, as Fichte assumed to do, in
his doctrine of consciousness as transcending mere
sense by a "knowing that you know." Kant firmly
settled the ultimate authority as to knowledge —
the canon and last word of human reason and cer-
tainty — in the plain "I think" — of course, of the
cultivated man. Por there is a plenty of error and
illusion, which he would not consent to call "false
thinking, but rather would stoutly hold to be not
thinking at all — he having himself determined the
only sure method of thought.

Emerson, on the other hand, would seem to have
favored the more intuitive confidence of Prof. James.
He said : "We know truth when we see it, as we know,
when we are awake, that we are awake." But this
is rather high morality than astute metaphysics.
("Truth" is explicitly the condemnation of knowl-
edge ; it is a quality of resemblance, not of identity,
which last is the only reality of possession. Knowl-
edge cannot realize the life of that which it in fact
is not. Truth is a false pretence of the representa-
tion of an originality which does not appear in its
portrait. In other words, the truth of a mere —
i. e, pretended — re-presentation would disqualify
the original, as being no more essential than is a
copy.)

However, the same self-reliance appears in the
consciousness of Tennyson, as shown in an anecdote


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 215

which has been extensively published, as related by
John Tyndall :

Tennyson and Tyndall had been in consultation
with "Master" Jowett, of Balliol College, and Tyn-
dall relates that after the Master had retired the
poet resumed the previous discussion, which had in-
volved his peculiar trances, and had provoked cer-
tain rather cavalier suggestions by the eminent
translator of Plato as to their possible illusion.
According to Tyndall's account, Tennyson imme-
diately retorted upon the animadversions of his late
guest with the utmost seriousness and (for him at
least) extraordinary heat. He said: *'By God
Almighty, there is no illusion in the matter! It is
no nebulous ecstasy, no confused state, but a con-
dition of transcendent wonder associated with ab-
solute clearness of mind."

This striking expression — the very ideal of what
one must think the announcement of a "mystery"
should be — comports perfectly with the definition
which the poet vouchsafed to me in 1874, and which,
with his implied permission, was widely published at
that time. I quote partially this letter:

"Farmgford, Freshwater, Isle of Wight,

May 7, 1874.
"Sir : — I have to thank you for your essay. . . .
"It is a very notable sketch of metaphysic, end-
ing yet once more, apparently, in the strange history
of human thought, with the placid Buddha, as veri-
fied by nineteenth century ansesthetics.

"Although I have a gleam of Kant, I have never
turned a page of Hegel — all that I know of him


216 PLURIVERSE

having come to me obiter, and obscurely through the
talk of others; nor have I ever rigorously delivered
myself to dialectics.

"I have never had any revelations through anaes-
thetics, but a kind of waking trance — this for lack
of a better word — I have frequently had, quite up
from boyhood, when I have been all alone. This has
come upon me through repeating my own name to
myself silently, tiU all at once, as it were out of
the intensity of the consciousness of individuality,
individuality itself seemed to dissolve and fade away
into boundless being, and this not a confused state
but the clearest, the surest of the surest, utterly be-
yond words — where death was an almost laugh-
able impossibility — the loss of personality (if so
it were) seeming no extinction, but the only true
life.

"I am ashamed of my feeble description. Have I
not said the state is utterly beyond words? But in
a moment when I come back to my normal condition
of 'sanity' I am ready to fight for 'meine liebes ich,'
and to hold that it will last for jeons of aeons."

On page 158 of Vol. 2, of the "Tennyson Mem-
oirs," is given a previous draft of this letter, found
among the laureate's papers. The first paragraph
is nearly identical with the first of this ; but the latter
part runs to an account of Tennyson's only occasion
of being subjected to ansesthetic treatment and this
for a surgical operation. He wrote: "The friend
who held my hand and supplied the handkerchief,
told me that first of all" ( after he came to) "I blurted
out a long metaphysical term which he could not re-
word for me."


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 217

Had Tennyson repeated the experience he would
have recalled this expression.

In 1880, Sir William, then Professor, Ramsay,
conducted certain experiments upon himself, with
anaesthetic agents, chiefly ether, the results of which
experience, and others of later date, appeared in the
Journal of the Society for Psychical Research, of
1893-4.

In opening the topic Prof. Ramsay says (in view
of the fact that the various anaesthetics afford vari-
ous kinds of mental effect upon different persons) :
"On me all anesthetics produce the same mental
state . . . they all produce the same curious de-
lusion." He had a kind of culture in his process,
which in the early stages was oriented by natural
preconceptions and habits of thought; but these,
ever recurring at first, came gradually to be sup-
pressed and ignored, as he settled into one clear and
permanent insight, until at last he ceased to observe
them. Of this permanent insight he says: "An
overwhelming impression forced itself upon me that
the state in which I then was, was reality; that now I
had reached the true solution of the secret of the
universe, in understanding the secret of my own
mind; that all outside objects were merely passing
reflections on the eternal mirror of my mind —
something quite trivial and transitory. The main
and impressive fact for me was that I was self-exist-
ent, and that time and space were illusions. This
was the real ego, on whose surface ripples of incident
arose, to fade and vanish like the waves on a
pond. . . . Any remark (of others) wearied me


218 PLURIVERSE

because I had heard it so often before; I conceived
a low opinion of the being who could pass his life in
saying such a trivial and unimportant thing, and
I disdained to answer. ... I not merely knew
that it had happened before, but that I could have
predicted that it would happen at that particular
moment."

He speaks: "Absurdly self-conscious all through
— every little event so signal and important as
eternally the item for this particular instant, I
swallow — important . . . this is a stage in the
cycle of the universe (all events led up to this). . .
Each time I am under the influence of an anaesthetic
I am able to penetrate a little further into the un-
fathomable mystery. The recognition of past stages
does much to render the path familiar." (All this is
soliliquy, recorded by his secretary.)

"I do not think that I am a follower of Bishop
Berkeley in my ordinary everyday existence; my
tendency of mind is by training and by the nature
of my daily avocations, to suspend judgment — a
condition of scientific skepticism. But under the
influence of an anaesthetic all doubts vanish; I know
the truth of Berkeley's theory of existence — that
all feUow creatures are products of my consciousness,
and that although they may be real to themselves,
and have each a world of his own, to me they are
only parts of my thoughts, and moreover not very
important elements in the chain of my life.

"But the feelings evoked are disappointing. It
is not satisfying to realize that the goal of the uni-
verse is of this nature. The circumstances are so
trivial as to make it painful to believe that this is


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION 219

the scheme of nature ; that 'that far off divine event
to which the whole creation moves' should have in
its progress no higher deeds, and for its outcome
no nobler aim than I am then conscious of."

(Observe here how this scientist has then forgot-
ten, in the primordial secret as it is for all, the
world of later man's achievements — the wonders of
astronomy and politics and religion and art.)

"My feelings are sometimes those of despair at
finding the secret of existence so little worthy of
regard. It is as if the veil that hides whence we
come, what we are, and what will become of us, were
suddenly rent, and as if a glimpse of the Absolute
burst upon us. The conviction of its truth is over-
whelming, but it is painful in the extreme. I have
exclaimed — 'Good heavens ! is this all?' Such im-
pressions, exceedingly difficult to express in words,
pass off gradually. After five minutes they begin
to fade in intensity ; the conviction of their absolute
truth is less deep-seated; that there exists an ordi-
nary workaday world, in which I and innumerable
others play our parts, is again realized, and in ten
minutes or a quarter of an hour the state of mind is
again perfectly normal. There is no after impres-
sion, and my nerves are as steady as usual."

(It is to be remembered that these impressions are
not crescent in ansesthesia as such, but occur as the
effect is passing off. In his experiments Prof. Ram-
say kept renewing the dose at intervals of from one
or two up to fifteen minutes and then reporting.)

Prof. Ramsay furnished in his account certain
notes taken by his secretary, giving some of his
exclamations at different stages of his anassthesia.


220 PLURIVERSE

of which I copy a few. Observe that "the universe"
is his constant burthen:

"Everything has recurred before — sense of hav-
ing been here before . . . the table, mantel, etc.,
having been always there. . . . This one little
piece of enormous coherence of universe — utterly
ridiculous in its smallness. . . . Every bit of
these events recurred; cycle of events recurring
bothers me greatly, because I expect each stage
to go further — that is, stage in evolution of
the universe. This is the scheme of the universe and
my being here, but I never before reached the point
of having taken ether before. I will stop short and
explain (here he was nearly in his normal state of
mind) : In the ordinary workaday world this is
an untenable theory — I mean the sense of 'myself
alone' — of what affects me — there is a sense of
precisely similar events. I believe, as far as I can
comprehend, that this is the universe. Here I have
recognized the ultimate scheme (genius?) of the uni-
verse as far as I am concerned up to a certain stage.
It wiU probably be worked out when I die. Yet
that is not the end — I shall go on after that, but
to what?" (Resumes the ether.) "Oh, by Jove!
Yes, I know: After all it comes to this-: It is one
or the other theory of the universe, and mine must
be the most probable — mine or somebody else's.
Well, I may be the central person in the universe —
I don't mind — I can't help it. . . . Have I been
unconscious for a considerable time? By Jove! if
one only knew the whole thing. This may be the
truth; it is my own view, and deserves to be known.
. . . People choose to imagine that there are


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 221

worlcjs — that is ito say, build mental cosmogonies.
Of course it is an open question, whether other
people have existence as well as one's self. By some
chance I am picked out for the central purpose of
the universe. In this state of mind quarrels and
reconciliations, woes and fears, are no longer the
chief things of the universe, but one asks, where does
it come from? what is it all for — which is the
normal, which is the abnormal state of affairs?
When I come back to my sane consciousness I hold
the ether state to be abnormal, and vice versa. Of
course this is utterly absurd in ordinary life. Now
I am sane again — but under ether there is only me."
Sir William then recalls a work by Sir H. Davy
on nitrous oxide, published in 1800, at the end of
which is an account of a symposium of twenty-nine
persons who took the gas with varying effects, of
which he ( Sir William) recognized chiefly those upon
Sir Humphrey himself. He quotes Davy as fol-
lows: "As I recovered my former state of mind I
felt an inclination to communicate the discoveries I
had made during the experiment. I endeavored to
recall the ideas ; they were feeble and indistinct. One
collection of terms, however, presented itself, and
with, the most intense belief and prophetic manner
I exclaimed to Dr. Kinglake, 'Nothing exists but
thoughts! The universe (sic) is composed of im-
pressions, ideas, pleasures and pains.' " Sir Wil-
liam adds: "It is curious that this, with Davy, was
an isolated occurrence — with me it was a perma-
nent impression." It should be remembered, in this
regard, that Sir Humphrey was probably the first
to discover this effect of modern anaesthetics.


222 PLURIVERSE

At the conclusion of his paper Sir William offers
the following reflections :

"It is somewhat startling to be confronted with
an unexpected condition of one's own mind. The
sajring 'in vmo Veritas' is, I suppose, intended to
imply that an intoxicated person will blurt out the
truth ; but the intoxication of anaesthetics forces me,
while in that condition, to believe that what I think
is true. The theory attributed to Bishop Berkeley
is a perfectly consistent one, and can be disputed
only on grounds of what we call 'common sense.' I
do not, in my ordinary state of mind, attribute any
importance to this theory, beyond regarding it as a
somewhat improbable, but incontrovertible specula-
tion; but I confess that, since my experience with
anaesthetics, I am disposed to regard it as worthy
of a little more consideration than it usually receives.
The difficulty in accepting it is our practically abso-
lute certainty of the existence of our fellow crea-
tures ; and the deduction that if A and B receive the
same impression at the same time, that impression
must be caused by some thing, external to both.
But in my anaesthetic state this objection presents
no difficulty to me; I conceive each ego (monad?)
to have its orbit, and to stand absolutdy alone,
conscious of but uninterfered with by the other
egos."

(Observe that this is his inference, and not his
insight — which was of himself as the only centre.)

"To choose a crude illustration: two mirrors re-
flect, but do not influence each other in any mechani-
cal or material sense. The recollection, which
remains after return to the ordinary state of mind.


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 223

of having had such Berkdeyan views, is, perhaps
naturally, not without some influence on the normal
mind, and, as I have said, it appears to me not wholly
absurd to reconsider the usual postulates of 'com-
mon sense.' In short, I am confronted under ether,
with what I may term 'recurrent events.' It is
necessary to form some theory which will reconcile
myself with this new environment ; and the idea that
the universe centres itself in one appears to me,
while in the anaesthetized state, to be a satisfactory
one. The fact remains that, while anesthetized, my
belief in that theory of existence which we may call
for short the Berkeleyan hypothesis, is immeasur-
ably more firm and decided than, in my normal state,
is my belief in the ordinai;ily accepted views of mat-
ter and motion which regulate the lives of most hu-
man beings."

He finally declares that in giving this account he
has been careful to exclude any intimations which
might otherwise have lingered in his mind as to ex-
periences of which he had heard or read of others
under anaesthetic conditions.

We may remark that Ramsay's disappointment
or disUlusion is in the fact that the revelation makes
so intensely secular, inevitable and homely what he
had before regarded as necessarily sacred and im-
posing and foreign.

The adumbration of Sir William Ramsay on the
seeming inconsequence of the anaesthetic revelation
— such as his protest, "Is this all?" etc. — recurs
emphatically in the following letter addressed to me
in May, 1911, from No. 19 Chester Terrace, Re-
gents Park, N. W. London:


224 PLURIVERSE

"Dear Sir: — It is interesting to find that your
experiences under anaesthetics have been similar to
mine. I faney that a good many people are thus
affected. I have been at least fifty times. But I
don't think there is anything 'behind.' Anyhow, I
don't intend to study it further, for one gets no fur-
ther by repetition, and I am sure it is bad for the
nerves. "Yours faithfully,

"W. Ramsay.'»

This phrase, ''anything behind" — doubtless
meant to repress any metaphysical expectations from
the experience — has for the philosopher a practical
significance. There is nothing imminent in it for
one whose outlook is expectant of a royal and monis-
tic explanation. If any really great intellectual
achievement is to be recorded, I fancy it rather in
the Egyptian style, in which England said to Pha-
raoh, "I will make a man of you" :

It was not a duke or earl, nor yet a viscovmi,
'Twas not a big brass general who came.

But a man in khaki kit, who could handle men a bit.
And his baggage labeled. Sergeant What's His
Name.

Sir William's depression under the commonplace
and secular tone of the world-mystery accords very
well with our democratic raultiverse, which dispenses
with the brazen general Absolute, and the tape-tied
Infinite, whose quasi prestige is that it is unlimited ;
but just therefore it has no definition, and conse-
quently it has no practical use. Perhaps our
heavenly expectations have been too prodigious to


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 225

prove either possible or just. Strictly, we have
no right to an opinion about anything. The mo-
ment that anything is classed, as "this," or "the,"
it is emasculated of the subjective element, and for
idealism cannot be real.

About ten years after the publication of these
experiences of Sir William Ramsay there was held
a symposium of persons who had been led by his ex-
ample to test the anaesthetic vision for themselves,
at No. 20 Hanover Square, London, June 24, 1904.
The gathering comprised representatives of quite
distinguished literary and social eminence, and the
current discussion of the topic had the advantage
of not only frank and ingenuous expression but of
scientific and historical criticism. A considerable
number of the associates related their individual ex-
periences, which, however various in seemingly tem-
peramental details, fell generally under the summing-
up of Mr. Ernest Dunbar, the lecturer of the eve-
ning:

"After the first effects of ether have passed off,
there comes a time of profound intellectual stimula-
tion, during which the mind reasons with astonishing
rapidity, choosing, in some individuals, transcenden-
tal lines, appearing to solve, once and for all, the
mystery of the universe."

The hundreds of letters that came to me after the
distribution of my pamphlet in 1874 gave a feeling
or sentiment indited by Emerson, as if "all the
books in the world were written by one man." An
expert knows the hand. Why do we call a certain
class of unsophisticated persons "naturals"? The


226 PLUmVERSE

charge carries nothing against them, either moral
or intellectual, often quite the contrary, yet they
are — simple. (We need not to dwell upon their
psychology.) So when we look at a good portrait,
we know there was an original behind it, although we
may have never seen the party who sat for it : such
an artist could not be so depraved as to have mis-
represented his subject. Even so with these letters :
they all struggle with an ineluctable purport that
shames the best definition. I select one that is
rather more "literary" than the average:

"I haven't got what you would call an intellectual
memory. Things come to me in flashes out of ex-
perience, and pull me up short, and I say to myself,
'Yes, that's it — that's it, I understand ; I see why
it is so, and what it means, and how far it extends.
It is five thousand years old. Adam thought it after
Cain killed Abel — or Abel thought it, just before
he died — or Eve learned it from Lilith — or it struck
Abraham when he went to sacrifice Isaac. Some-
times things like that hit me deep, here in the desert.
I can see just over on the horizon the tents of Moab
in the wilderness. I feel that yesterday and to-day
are the same ; that I have crossed the prairies of the
everlasting years, and played with Ishmael in the
wild hiUs, and fought with Ahab; and I feel that
time and the world are small affairs. You see how
it is : I never was trained to think, and I get stunned
by thoughts that strike me as from right out of the
centre. Sometimes I'd like to write them down, but
I can't write — in fact I can't think. You'll know
how it is."

Is not this fine, however tantalized by "caccethes


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION 227

scrihendi"? Here was your poet of the light that
fails, of the matter that cannot rise to form. Given
the something born but never made — the something
that touched Isaiah's hallowed lips with fire — this
fellow might have voiced the intelligible forms of
ancient poets and the fair humanities of old religion ;
he too, like the lost Keats, might have stood with
Ruth amid the alien corn, or with stout Cortez and
his men, silent upon a peak of Darien. He too —
why not? might have sniffed the Paestan gardens,
where the air is sweet with violets running wild
through broken friezes and fallen capitals :

Sweet as when Tully, writing down his thoughts
(Turning to thee, divime Philosophy),
Sailed slowly by, two thousand years ago.
For Athens, when a ship, if northeast winds
Blew from the Paestan Gardens, slacked her course.

The reader shall need to consent to this being of
genius, however at last we fail of the genius of being.
We have read, of those explorers for the Pole, that
he who once enters the Arctic dream can never recur,
with his former interest, to the temperate vocations
of his race; for evermore the loadstone draws him,
and evermore his fancy kindles the opaline splendors
of the eternal ice. And it is even so with those who
have discarded the sensuous limitation of reality, and
realized that a comprehension is unthinkable; there
is a wanderlust of the monad that is ever tangent
from the fabulous One. There is a larger sanity
and a surer fixity for the far stars whose orbits
know no centre of pluriversal space.


228 PLURIVERSE

To these experimenters, whose besetting and baf-
fling thought is ever of the "universe," and again the
universe, we may say. You are sane, although, so
far as explanation is concerned you are using the
wrong words. For holding the revelation strictly
to the homogeneity of intelligence, and as due to
pure thought at its highest tension, the solipsism
that puzzled Ramsay and Tennyson and Davy and
so many others is scientific sanity at its best. Until
one has realized that his present thought is the ul-
timate triumph of nature — that all history has led
up to this — that all the efficiencies of the universe
have resulted in this, and pre-eminently in the criti-
cism of this-, as the iris reflected from the highest
bubble on the last wave of time, he has not been
whoUy and truly sane.

Your solid Englishman or German appeals to the
great world, and deems the Frenchman extravagant
when he calls the universe to witness his exploit ; but
the French spirit is of the three the most highly
generalized ; its enthusiasm shows no distraction, how-
ever averse to the company of less volatile disposi-
tions. It will rather stay at home than emigrate;
your Frenchman belongs in France. He has the
deepest sense of national solidarity and fatality,
inspiring a financial faith beyond that of other na-
tions. His national debt, which no one cares to
have paid — and why should it be, if rightly in-
curred? was, at the beginning of the world war
some five hundred million francs more than the debts
of England, Germany and the United States com-
bined.

It shall not be surprising, then, if the high tension


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 229

of the Gallic spirit appreciates certain aesthetic
values, among which a blunder might be worse than
a crime, and the angels of high heaven, who weep at
man's fantastic tricks, should be less grieved at the
exceeding sinfulness of sin than they are discomfited
by the utter fatuity of foolishness and fudge.

(An American, however, can hardly accept any
foreigner as the highest assthetic result. Our mon-
grel breed has absorbed and submerged all racial
peculiarities. An American actor will imitate the
speech of any alien people, but on no foreign stage
can be heard any attempt to mimic plain United
States. This is what Walt called "the tasteless water
of souls.")

The following letter, characteristic of a large
class, was sent to me through the kindness of Prof.
Hodgson (45 Conduit St. Regent Street, London,
January 18, 1883), he having furnished the writer
(Edmund Gurney, 26 Montpelier Square, London,
S. W.,) a copy of my essay :

"I had this extraordinary experience myself last
year, under nitrous oxide, harmonizing with your
description; but the result was almost ludicrously
disappointing. For half a minute or more after I
had 'come to,' I was quite sure that the problem was
solved and that when I got my breath I could tell
the dentist about it, and that it had something to
do with time. When I got my breath I found that
I could not get it out, then and there; but walking
home I meditated an article about it in a philosophi-
cal journal. Somehow this conception dwindled in
the course of the evening, and my, plan reduced it-


230 PLURIVERSE

self to a letter to William James, which, however,
would (I felt sure) teem with interest; but when,
after a few days, I sat about the writing of the
letter, there was no more to tell than I have told
you."

Many patients who have recovered from near
drowning have reported wonderful reminiscences of
their past lives. Probably the pressure of an un-
usual volume of blood distends the wrinkled and
faded palimpsests of the brain, and freshens the field
of memory under anxious introspection. And doubt-
less the exhilaration, of which anaesthesia seems to
be or to follow an excess, is still vivifying the menta-
tion of the patient while he is "coming to." Nor is
it surprising that one under high stimulation should
be lured to the more poetical regions of his own
culture, which for us are apt to be in the historical
and sacred past, and to savor of the problems of
philosophy.

Dr. Holmes, "The Autocrat of the Breakfast
Table," etc., although sharing that contempt for
human nature and its manifestations which charac-
terises the medical profession — whose patrons are
mostly lying on their backs — was yet thoroughly
loyal to the ether revelation as a unique concernment
with the universe as the Mystery and the Whole, or
as he oftenest said, with Being. I quote a reminis-
cence of his conversation with Moncure D. Conway,
a literary cosmopolite:

"He told me that when ether was discovered he
had such reverence for it that he thought it might
possess some spiritual virtue, and resolved to experi-
ment on himself to find if it had any psychological


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 231

eflPect. He prepared the ether, and having placed
beside his bed a small table, with pencil and paper
to record his impressions on awakening, he lay down
and applied the drug. Sure enough, he presently
found himself just sufficiently conscious to seize the
pencil, and with a sentiment of vast thought wrote
something down. It proved to be these words: 'A
strong scent of turpentine pervades the Whole.'

"But he was not satisfied with that, and made
another effort. 'This time,' he said, 'I felt as I
wrote that I really had seen the secret of the universe.
The words proved to be, *Put Jesus Christ into a
Brahma press and that's what you will get.' "

I need hardly remind the serious reader that there
was a humorous quirk in the fibre of Dr. Holmes,
that was sometimes prejudicial to his really fine
genius. As more to our purpose, and in justice to
him, I will recall in poor prose a poem of his, en-
titled "The Parson's Mare":

"She was a shambling nag, of unknown antece-
dents, that had come to the old clergyman in the
way of a 'donation,' and at the county fair the
neighboring boys, for a lark, had brought her,
hitched to the parson's dilapidated sulky, as an entry
on the race track, a burlesque to the more preten-
tious contestants. The managers humorously gave
her a place and a start with the rest. . . . But
suddenly there was a surprise; the nondescript was
forging to the front, and actually setting the pace.
The experts were dumbfounded at her. What, in
the name of all professionalism, possessed her?
Could they but have looked within, and caught her
inspiration, the atavism of a long-forgotten record


232 PLURIVERSE

was relighting the vestiges of a great career ; it was
a palingenesis out of the past. Sometime, somewhere

— maybe when the Assyrian came down like a wolf
on the fold — maybe when the warhorse laughed at
the shaking of the spear — maybe while the dames
of Rome their gilded hair waved to the wind — she
had romped the stadium through victorious cheers !

— She left them all behind. The confusion was such
that her time was not taken (a shrewd omission on
the part of the story teller) , and having exhaled her
inspiration she was led halting back to her stall."

There is an unpublished supplement to the story,
in which it appears that the ill-requited pastor had
an authentic record of his shabby assistant, that he
had trailed her marauders, and had observed the de-
nouement through a crack in the fence.

Had my issue, in 1874, of "The Anaesthetic Reve-
lation and the Gist of Philosophy" brought no other
responses than such as I have quoted here, I should
have despaired of the audience on which the fate
of the present essay may depend. There are plenty
of people who have learned the impossibility of the
old-fashioned "truth" — the false pretense of a gen-
uine re-presentation of fact — and have character-
ized this as "a queer world" — which helps its
psychology about as much as does the reminiscence
of one who has overeaten of mince pie for supper,
and had "a glimpse of his grandmother." But there
are well-practiced experts in the mechanism of
thought who have clearly realized in this experience
the impasse which halts the logical conception of
self-knowledge.

Among the cleverest of these I recall Xenas Clark,


THE ANJSSTHETIC REVELATION 233

a young philosopher of Amherst, who died in the '80's,
much regretted. In connection with the anaesthetic
revelation he is quoted by James, in "The Varieties of
Religious Experience," as follows:

"It is the one sole and sufficient insight why (or
not why, but how) the present is pushed on by the
past, and sucked forward by the vacuity of the
future. Its inevitableness defeats all attempts at
stopping or accounting for it. It is all precedence
and presupposition, and questioning is in regard
to it forever too late. It is an imtiation of the past.
The real secret would be the formula by which the
*now' keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet never es-
capes. What is it, indeed, that keeps existence ex-
foliating? The formal being of anything, the
logical definition of it, is static. For mere logic
every question contains its own answer — we simply
fill the hole with the dirt we dug out. Why
are twice two four? Because, in fact, four is
twice two. Thus logic finds in life no pro-
pulsion, only a momentum. It goes because it is
a-going. But the revelation adds : it goes because it
is and was a-going. You walk, as it were, round
yourself in the revelation. Ordinary philosophy is
like a hound hunting his own trail. The more he
hunts the farther he has to go, and his nose never
catches up with his heels, because it is forever
ahead of them. So the present is already a fore-
gone conclusion, and I am ever too late to understand
it. But at the moment of recovery from ansesthesis,
just then, before starting on life, I catch, so to
speak, a glimpse of my heels, a glimpse of the eternal
process just in the act of starting. The truth is


234. PLURIVERSE

that we travel on a journey that was accomplished
before we set out ; and the real end of philosophy is
accomplished, not when we arrive at, but when we
remain in, our destination (being already there) —
which may occur vicariously in this life when we
cease our intellectual questioning. That is why
there is a smile upon the face of the revelation, as
we view it. It tells us that we are forever half a
second too late — that's all, 'You could kiss your
own lips, and have all the fun to yourself,' it says,
'if you only knew the trick. It would be perfectly
easy if they would just stay there till you got round
to them.'

"The Anaesthetic Revelation is the Initiation of
Man into the Immemorial Mystery of the Open
Secret of Being, revealed as the Inevitable Vortex of
Continuity. Inevitable is the word. Its motive is
inherent — it is what has to be. It is not for any
love or hate, nor for joy nor sorrow, nor good nor
iU< End, beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.

"It affords no particular of the multiplicity and
variety of things; but it fills appreciation of the
historical and the sacred with a secular and inti-
mately personal illumination of the nature and mo-
tive of existence, which then seems reminiscent — as
if it should have appeared, or shall yet appear, to
every participant thereof.

"Although it is at first startling in its solemnity,
it becomes directly such a matter of course — so old-
fashioned, and so akin to proverbs, that it inspires
exultation rather than fear, and a sense of safety,
as identified with the aborginal and the universal.
But no words may express the imposing certainty


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 235

of the patient that he is realizing the primordial,
Adamic surprise of Life.

"Repetition of the experience finds it ever the
same, and as if it could not possibly be otherwise.
The subject resumes his normal consciousness only
to partially and fitfully remember its occurrence,
and to try to formulate its baiBing import, with only
this consolatory afterthought: that he has known
the oldest truth, and that he has done with human
theories as to the origin, meaning, or destiny of the
race. He is beyond instruction in "spiritual
things.' "

If one had casually asked in an esoteric circle
(possibly antedating the incident), "What is the
anaesthetic revelation?" this rather ambitious ver-
sion of Clark would "stand him off," at least for the
moment, as the right psychology of the experience,
with little or no claim to any philosophy of it. As
for that, so much depends upon one's viewpoint. I
have just now brushed a wandering gnat from my
manuscript, smearing the paper, and summarily
effacing an ephemeral existence. This little citizen
was one of us ; yet the Congress will proceed with its
enactments; the world war will not be ostensibly
affected by its fate. And in a certain large sense
it is not "considering too curiously" (as Horatio
protested) to adjust our own parasitic humility by
the gnat's unimportance — providing that we do not
erase its cosmic significance. For although we and
our monuments and our memory are doomed to thus
sink out of the sensuous reality of the everywhere-
as-here (at which event no autociratic One shall make
light of our poor individuality), the fact may re-


236 PLURIVERSE

main that all centres are identical (though not co-
incident) in this illumination, having each a signifi-
cant importance and a dignity that gets no shadow
from the fabulous and impossible Whole : nay, rather
takes on a dynamic originality (if such may be)
wherein the monad may strike heroically about him,
for good or ill, assuming fearlessly that "the throne
and equipage of God's almightiness" have no deeper
nor other realization than his own — that the pluri-
verse is of many, and that he is at least one, and
as good an authority as are innumerable ones.

It was as aiming to reach this position that I
arraigned the inconsequence of philosophy, having
long observed its failure of any ultimate generaliza-
tion or comprehension. And although neither have
I achieved in thought any masterful conception of
the dream which we inhabit, I feel that by eliminat-
ing the needless task of impossible comprehension
and beginning, and more determinately orienting in-
ward the path of explanation, I have brought to
bear upon this anresthetic expression a criticism of
philosophy as the soul's endeavor to envisage itself,
and to adjust itself to an environment which, how-
ever to be admonished of a due humility, this insight
cannot forego.

Not that I am expecting from this orientation of
thought more determinately inward — as in fact it
is modernly disposed — any clearer solution of the
classic problems of philosophy. The microscope
and the telescope alike fail of finality or ultimate
limitation; the Midst is everywhere. Although the
Many evaporate and disenchant the mystical One,
as an outwardly objective expectation, still the infin-


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 237

itesimal route is as well bottomless as "the infinite"
is indefinite. These are all scientific facts; and it
were an idle and impudent esoteric pretension that
the anaesthetic insight affords a clearance of them.
If it were a revelation in that sense the reader might
fairly demand what it is, while the proponent is
merely trying to indicate where it is to be en-
countered. There is no pretense in our treatise of
philosophising either this or anything else.

That there might have been a world of dead fact
is a supposition comparatively easy to us ; but when
we add to the fact a knowledge of it, and are driven
by idealism and solipsis to assume that the knowl-
edge, so far as we are concerned, determines the
nature of the fact, there results a convolution and
confusion which a modest citizen may confess him-
self to not quite understand. But that these con-
ditions culminate abnormally in the anaesthetic ex-
perience (still possibly as mere sanity at its best)
only a negligible bigotry should hereafter deny.

It was said of old, "the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom." I shall not further arraign
the translations of the Vulgate ; suffice it that in the
most critical usage the word "fear," above, means a
reverent cognition, which can only by implication
carry a punitive inference. But surely, however the
heart of the monad may be coincident with the only
possible centre, and send its pulses through the pose
of Ajax (who in our day would need only a rubber
suit for his defiance of the lightning) , we must per-
ceive that as a transient visitor his role is one of
humility, as in so large a sense ancillary and depend-
ent. He has ample ground for reverence; and


238 PLURIVERSE

though he may conclude that no personal one is
comprehensively all-important or controlling in the
multiverse — and that all notions of beginning and
cause are but shadows cast by the rims of his finite
binoculars — it is a transcendent necessity of spirit
to declare and wonder at this, and to regard it as
so far One, and a wonder or miracle into which his
entrance is attended by a sense of initiation as strong
and definite as if some "all obliterated tongue" had
warned him, in the voice of a common fate, Now You
Know!

Doubtless there is a Mystery, but it must not
stigmatize reality ; the mystery is on our side of the
fact. Despite Schwegler's "certain existent un-
reason," it were the height of presumption on our
part to proclaim the ultimate surd. The factual
world needs no such accounting for, in itself, as we
need for it. We are late, we are ephemeral, and
mainly inconsequent; yet the fact that the mystery
is in our own incompetence only lends dignity and
charm to its revelation, and to our initiation into a
prestige supremely worth while. Even though by
great progress we should come to a stage where this
insight would be normal — and why not, since even
now, if we cared, we could wire the round earth, and
whisper into our own ears ? — yet let it become com-
monplace, scientific, secular where now it is com-
paratively sacred, still in the culture of the new-
comer it must ever be what Clark characterized as
"an initiation of the past."

The revelation, for us, is of sanity at its utmost
tension and interest, realizing at once the effort and
the fatuous incongruity and impossibility of self-


THE ANiESTHETIC REVELATION 239

vision, and having a clear and unquestionable con-
sciousness that this condition and this effort realize
the genius of being, and eiFect the process of time;
but above all is a sense of admonition — perhaps an
after-glow from our religious associations — that
this is the secret of the world, inevitably such; no
other account of it can be mentionable in the same
connection.

I have to reiterate that this clear vision has
nothing to do vrith philosophy. It stands alone,
"like Adam's recollection of his fall." What we in-
tend by "the genius of being" has no relation to the
empirical facts of the world, nor to any purpose or
process of "life." The problems of metaphysics —
the reconciliation of the static and dynamic view-
points, the question as between a sufficient and man-
aging intelligence and a fated collocation of monads
and atoms, or as between a comprehended one or
whole and an unlimited diversity of ones which carry
the prime secret each at its own centre — all this is
as nothing in the transcendent solipsis where the
Monad is the only One. The ^est are the things
which are Caesar's.

We have now to gather up the dangling threads
of our story, and knot them for a religion and a
life; — hoping that the fasces may have a consist-
ency and strength which may not have been appre-
hensible in the individual shafts; and that the fond
monism that we have dialectically disparaged may be
at least transcendentally and mystically rehabili-
tated. Our essay would be wholly impertinent (as
possibly it is in any event) if it did not so far coun-
tenance the professorial obsession as to regard the


240 PLURIVERSE

world as this, and this one, at least as a topic for
discourse — such discourse, maybe, as Emerson sat-
irised as "puss and her tail."

The pretensions of professional philosophy have
been heartlessly disingenuous. Even with Fichte,
they were oriented less toward a livable faith than
to a triumphant demonstration of the ignorance in
which faith habitually reposes. Your even Chris-
tian does but dream of the contradictions involved in
what he calls "the truth."

Firstly then, our philosophical curiosity arises as
to the world's beginning and its making ; for we our-
selves begin, and we do some making, and we natu-
rally assume that the world at large should have such
an accounting for — all the time forgetting that
any objective thing accounting for it would have
the same mystery as involves the thing itself, and
serve to merely postpone or push back its "reason"
— which must be in us if anywhere, and not otherwise
required; i. e., the secret of a creation can be real-
ized only in our own actually creating; to see the
fact as being done were not to detect the motive
force employed. Wherefore the saying, "the reason
of things is reason."

Here the vulgar psychology comes in, and claims
the whole secret of so simple an effect as the reason
of reason, in the self-relation of consciousness —
the "prime fact" that such is knowledge that it
knows itself, and is its own ground and reason —
showing the basic principle of all explanation and
all being. But we have sufficiently shown that iself-
relation as a theory is not a philosophy or a logical
account of our inspired thought and will.


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 241

Nevertheless all our advices from the anaesthetic
field — and especially such as that of Xenas Clark
— show that sanity at its highest tension (and
interest) not only inheres in but evolves by a curi-
osity and effort for self-knowledge, never dreaming
that it is but an orifice of the supernal deep — a
mouthpiece or mask, to be sure, but the supernal
has no other voice ; the monad is your only one ; for
no man hath seen God at any time, save as the Son
hath personated him.

(We should connote here the solipsism of Ramsay
and Tennyson; for the world is full of worlds, as
many as there are organisms ; and to whom a thing
appears, that thing is.)

But now, for a life, we turn back from philosophy,
as from the green-eyed jealousy which makes the
meat that it feeds upon, to the psychology of Jesus.
Dropping all theological controversy as such, and
listening only to the voice of experience and common
sense, is it not pragmatically true that every crea-
ture is secondary and inspired, regardless of his in-
stant conceit of originality — and yet more pro-
foundly regardless of the mystery that in that con-
ceit may lurk the only hope of ultimate and divine
explanation?

Said Hegel : "It is truer to say not that we think,
but that thinking goes on with us."

Every breath that we voluntarily draw is, in the
cosmic sense, an irrelevant interference with divine
providence. We have no need to do it ; with or with-
out our volition it will be done; and the determination
not to do it — which would be in the least violent
method of suicide — is one that nature most essen-


242 PLURIVERSE

tially abhors. We have no account of any man
succeeding in such an attempt, although many have
thus experimented.

Have we not here, in this insistence of nature, the
occult basis of that admonition of the Master, to
take no thought for the morrow, nor for what we
shall eat or drink, nor for wherewithal we shall be
clothed? How shall a man's sins of the past be
remitted in the divine assumption of their respon-
sibility ; unless it shall be equally true of the present
that our heart-strings are in divine hands, and that
our native impulses are entitled to the second-
thought of God with us.?

But this taking no thought for the morrow, and
the rendering unto Csesar of the things which are
Caesar's, require transcendental interpretation. Of
course one shall take thought, lest he starve, or walk
into the fire. These things will be according to
intention, and faith without works is dead; but to
intend them in the expectation of impunity were to
"tempt the Lord, thy God." But there should be
obvious here the possibility of a serene composure,
as of a double nature, at once active and passive,
that should advance with a lofty courage, subject
only to the categorical imperative of its better self,
as interpreting all the divinity that concerns it.

What is hardest to express, or to believe that
one has expressed, in this connection, is the unique
fact which I have again and again reiterated, that
it is a revelation — the revelation of the genius of
being. When this in its turn is made a topic for
criticism and gossip, and the assured and busied
commonsense retorts that one knows as much as


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 243

another about that; or when the metaphysical ex-
pert recalls the dialectic difficulties of knowledge
trying to know itself, or of a becoming that con-
tinues with only becoming for its result, or of a
gwasi-reality between a future and a past — then
the inveterate skeptic must have his fling: These
puzzles, which philosophy has mumbled over for
thousands of years, are in your tenser ideation only
more emphatically intricated — ». e. you are more
aghast at the Mystery which still baffles definition —
else why not define it? There needs no ghost come
from the grave to proclaim the Mystery; any pre-
tense of a revelation should rationalize and resolve
it. In brief, wherein are you didactically the wiser
for it, as an instant generalization of the classic
problems of philosophy?

Now, humbly begging pardon, philosophy has had
heretofore no such generalization as is here so superi-
orly announced. I would respectfully recall the ani-
madversion of William James, that there is no
complete generalization, whether in theory or in
fact, for us; I have but added my own conclusion
that there can be none such for any one. (The no-
tion of a finite God, if not utterly prepoisterous, is
incongruous at its best.)

As Dr. Johnson remarked to the aspiring youth
who sought his advice as to the best dictionary,
"either of them is good enough for you," so this
treatise, which, eliminating monism, comprehension
and self-relation, should clear the haze of what has
been called philosophy, may well prove, if not a rev-
elation, at least a clarification to the average student,
especially if his culture has utilized the regretful


244 PLURIVERSE

sentence of Herr Eucken that philosophy as a pur-
suit has failed.

But all this pseudo disparagement or deprecation
and gua«i-explanation of the classic Mystery drifts
idly over the weird and solemn consciousness —
"clearest of the clearest, surest of the surest, weird-
est of the weirdest" — of an intimate and personal
relation to the Inevitable, whose continuance is in
and through its wondrous appreciation of its own
precedence and consequent necessity.

I have tried often, but cannot come nearer to the
Ansesthetic Revelation. But what then? It is no
fad or bantling of mine. On the contrary, as Sir
William Ramsay noticed, many people have en-
countered it, and like Edmund Gurney have passed
it as unthinkable in set terms — without which we can
neither know nor remember. But the boasted pro-
gress of the race wiU be shamelessly inadequate if we
have come to a time when the historical secret which
philosophy has coveted is empirically accessible, only
to be inconsequently neglected.

After this, our best (however unsatisfactory)
pronouncement, the persistent reiteration, "What is
your revelation?" or, "What is it about?" is in bad
form — a kind of counting of the spoons. Know-
ing is the soul's all, whether in her birth, her bridal,
her business or her vacation. Man fell for knowl-
edge. Knowing is the excellence and the ecstasy of
being ; it is everything, to be — a constant gratula-
tion over what is not, or is potentially or con-
jecturally. It is investiture in the purple, in the
divine right, and it is sufficient in itself.

And now inexorable Time admonishes me to have


THE ANESTHETIC REVELATION 24S

done with this world. I am thankful at having seen
the show; and although, after eighty-five years, the
stars are flickering slightly, and the winds are some-
thing worn, I am still clear and confident in thai
religion of courage and content which cherishes
neither regrets nor anticipations.

Yet one little dream I would have come true:
Somewhere, anywhere, though hopefully at some not-
unfrequented garden-side, my dust, with its "all-ob-
literated tongue," should seem to inspire the legend
— low by the veiling grass, but cut deep into endur-
ing stone:

GiEETING IP THOU HAST KNOWN !


SUPPLEMENTARY ESSAY^
THE POETICAL ALPHABET

A JURY of common-sense men might well be
excused for a verdict, over their book oaths,
that there is no important sense in what
follows here; but the same jury, asked if they had
ever heard

The Jiorns of elfland family blowing,
would probably make some haste in the protestation
that they never had. Common-sense men as such
are not philosophers, and they are not concerned
with the fact that logical truth is held to the arbitra-
ment of language, the production and determination
of which are therefore of prime importance in phil-
osophical explanation.

It was on a June morning in 1854! that I entered
the publishing house of James Munroe and Com-
pany of Boston (and Cambridge) with a manu-
script which soon evoked a discussion as to why the
word icicle was not a fit name for a tub. That it
is not was promptly agreed, but its unfitness grew
into so many varieties of discrepancy which no
single principle would account for that the seeming
levity of the question sank under considerations of
philogical interest and importance.

246


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 247

Something in the natural sound of the spoken
words was the first relevant suggestion; when you
set down a tub it responds to that name. The shapes
of the two things are also responsive: the tuh is
short and stubby, while the icicle is spindling and
slim.

These points were very well taken — ». e., the
differences of sound and form; but numberless other
characteristics appeared. The icicle is delicate, it
is clear, brilliant, fragile, with at least a suspicion
of moisture, while the tub is merely fibrous and dry.
AU this goes without saying, in a certain aesthetic
appreciation, which does not yet generalize the gen-
ius which vulgarizes the tub. To illustrate this,
consider the use of the words entrails, reins, bowels
— all good in scientific and social discourse, but for
some unmentionable reason classic culture draws the
line at guts!

*'Well, what is the trouble with guts?"

I expounded here that they were vulgarized by the
absurd genius of u flat. And did a letter have a
genius.^ and would I refer to my manuscript and
oblige with the genius of u flat? I responded as
follows, tp wit :

"U, guttural, or flat, is a humorous savage, best
described in his own words: a huge, lubberly, blun-
dering dunderhead, a blubbering numskull and a
dunce, ugly, sullen, dull, clumsy, rugged, gullible,
glum, dmnpish, lugubrious — a stumbler, mumbler,
bungler, grumbler, jumbler - — a grunter, thumper,
tumbler, stunner — a drudge, , a trudge ; he lugs,
tugs, sucks, juggles, and is up to aU manner of
bulls — a musty, fussy, crusty, disgusting brute,


248 PLUmVERSE

whose head is his mng, his nose is a snub, or a pug, his
ears are lugs, his breasts dugs, his bowels guts, his
victuals grub, his garments duds, his hat a plug, his
child a cub, his dearest diminutive is chub or bub or
runt ; at his best he is bluiF, gruff, blunt ; 'his doublet
is of sturdy buff and though not sword, is 'cudgel
proof ; budge he will not, but will drub you with a
club, or a slug, nub, stub, butt, or rub you with
mud — for he is ever in a muss or a fuss — and
should you call him a grudging curmudgeon he gulps
up "ugh, fudge, stuff, rubbish, humbug" in high
dudgeon ; he is a rough, a blood-tub, a bummer, and
a "tough cuss" all around ; he has some hiunor, more
crudity, but no delicacy; of all nationalities you
would take him for a Dutchman."

It is rather remarkable, in so far as the muscular
effort of utterance might be relevant, that the con-
tinuous or long u serves for the very opposite effect,
as we see it in the true, the pure, the sure, the beauti-
•ful, the gude. "True blue" is a proverb of the high-
est worth.

As for the Dutchman above, it may be recalled
that formerly we had a religious association called
the Dutch Reformed Church. For a long and
struggling time its sturdy independence clung stoutly
to the name Dutch, but with assured prosperity came
a more amenable style, and the Dutch prefix was
omitted from what is now called the Reformed
Church. '

Yet it was not wholly the u flat in Dutch that dis-
qualified it for devotional suggestion, but the tch was
exceptionable: itch, hitch, pitch, all defile; but when
the bard of natural history congratulates himself that


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 249
The gray bitch holds to the death,

we realize a manly poetry which the tea-table
would resent.

All the reading of my serious years has been at-
tended by this side consideration: that each of
the sounds represented by the several letters of the
alphabet is specially effective in conveying a cer-
tain significance ; and wherever language is popular
and happy it is so in accordance with these early
intuitions. That I was not singular in this sensi-
tiveness I was assured by hints dropped by Sweden-
borg and the poet Burns; but I had not as yet
chanced upon the "Kratylus" of Plato when I an-
onymously issued a characterization of the meanings
of all the alphabetic sounds. The subject of that
essay came up to me again, some years afterward, on
the occasion of Mr. Stephen Pearl Andrews's issuing
his theory in the Continental Magazine. Seeing his
article therein, I sent him my essay, and received in
return his cordial astonishment at the fact that I,
an unread tyro, had come by nature or instinct upon
mainly the same results which he claimed to have de-
duced as scientific necessities. He said his next
article in the Continental should include the gist
of my essay; but, sadly enough, the magazine had
come to its final end. In 1868 I made some extracts
from my essay for Putnam's Magazine, and that
periodical also soon after went under in the current of
literature. In all this time I knew nothing of the
"Kratylus," and I do not know even now whether Mrt
Andrews was better informed than myself. These


260 PLURIVERSE

statements are to be considered — and, fortunately,
it is the custom of gentlemen to believe one another —
otherwise what follows might seem at best only a les-
son improved; but when it truly appears that as a
youth of inconsiderable reading I in English un-
knowingly concurred with Plato in Greek, in the
interpretation of the sounds of a half dozen of the
letters, the fact has philological value as an unpreju-
diced approval of Plato's observation. For my own
part I can cheerfully forego the originality for the
comfort of the coincidence. There is good assur-
ance that Plato did not borrow from my list, in the
fact that in any case he left several of the more
significant letters behind him ; and even those mean-
ings which he did express seem to have only a
brawny immediacy which would be useless in the far
and fine suggestions of modern poetical art.

The use of words of mere onomatopy — buzz, hiss,
wheeze, sneeze, splash, slush, hum, roar, jingle —
requires little or no skill ; but the meagre and savage
art which produced these imitations was precursory
and prophetic of a later and more delicate and more
complex suggestiveness, reaching beyond mere sounds
to the faintest modes and qualities of fibre, surface,
lustre, distance, motion, humor, solemnity, contempt
— characters won out of all the phenomena of life,
and answering to the fullest knowledge, or intuition,
or inspiration, of all the mental phenomena of the
world at the moment of its use — to the true estimate
of the comparative age and aesthetic value of thought
and things — in brief, to the universality of ex-
perience. The essence we would precipitate rises
as an aroma out of the process of the growth and


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 251

decay of all things, and it is effected by considera-
tions the faintest and most remote, in the attenua-
tions of which a great poet may transcend the
apprehension of his less devoted readers.

I give here my alphabet as at first printed, with a
few merely abstract sketches taken from my quite
elaborate essay — little known and long forgotten.
Thp reader shall judge whether or not it deserved its
fate.

MAN'S NATURAL ALPHABET

a: vastbess, space, plane;

a: flatness.

b: brawn, bulk, initial force.

c: soft, as s; hard, as k.

ch, tch: a disgusting consistency.

d: (initial) determination, violence.

d: (final) solidity, end,

e: convergence, intensity, concentration.

^i i ethereality, fineness of fibre.

g: (hard) hardness.

gl: hardness and polish.

gr: hardness and roughness, grit, grain.

i: thinness, slininess, fineness.

I: inclining directions.

k: fineness of light and sound.

1: polish, chill, liquidity.

m: monotony.

n: negation, contempt.

o: volume, solemnity, nobility.

p: volume without fibre, pulp.

q: queer, questionable.

r: roughness, vibration.

s: moisture.

gb: wet confusion.

u: crudity, absurdity.

V, w, ys vehemence, general emphasis.

z: base, dry confusion.


252 PLURIVERSE

Diphthongst

au: Taolting, curving upward.

ou: roundness, downward.

oi : coil — external

ei: coil — intemaL

ia: downward and away — flourish.

As the compositor locates his types before him in
his case for his own convenience rather than as fol-
lowing the conventional order of the alphabet, so we
must treat firstly the five vowels, on which all the
other letters expend their force.

a. — "Far, far away, over the calm and mantling
wave" — so begins the boy's first romance — the
poetry of the ocean, of vastness, space, plane. The
word ocean, is used only for rolling and dashing
effects; the wave, the main, vast waters, watery
waste, or plain, are the poetical synonyms of ocean.
Lake, vale, straight, chase, race, trail, trace, away,
give distance and plane. Near at hand, long a gives
effect to slate, scale, flake, plate, cake, etc. Waver,
shake, quake, show horizontal vibration.

a. — The flat a shows its effect in mat, pack, strap,
slap, platter, flap, pat, flat, clap, etc. ; dash, splash,
thrash, give flat and lowdown effects. A stone much
broken, yet retaining its bulk, is said to be crushed,
but if its form is borne down it is mashed, smashed,
etc. Burns, in his poem, "The Vowels," calls a "a
grave, broad, solemn wight" ; this character belongs
to a only as in ah, or o flat.

e. — Swedenborg said that the angels who love
most use much the sound of o, while the more intel-
lectual and penetrating use more the sound of e.
Burns's notion of e was that of intense grief, as in


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 253

"greeting" (that is, in Scotch, weeping). The gen-
eral use of e is for concentration and convergence,
or intensity, the bringing of thought to a focus. All
the pet names and endearing diminutives end in e —
the wee things — the lee-tle, tee-ny things. The
child dwells on the e in pe'-ep, or pe^-eh, and in
me'-an, ke'-an, sne'-akmg, etc. Not so the baby
when he gives you his rattle-box ; he opens his mouth
and his heart with the instinct of the dative case,
and says "tah !" — outward and away. So when he
gets the wrong thing in his mouth his mother cries
"Ka! spit it out" ; whence possibly, the Greek kakos
— bad, as applied to things. The introspective
Hamlet says, "making night hideous and we fools of
nature," instead of us, the objective case. Zeal,
squeal, screech — to be, to see, to feel, are strong by
the use of e.

i — I, short, as in pin, has a stiff, prim, thin,
slim, spindling effect, as of the "bristling pines" ; or
when "Swift Camilla" "skims along the main." It
has a thinning, perpendicularly attenuating effect.
A "light skiff" is well mentioned ; and a "thin whiff."
hark, hear, how thin and clear!

Short i has a very lightening effect in sounds : as
in tinkle, clink, link — thin metallic sounds of a per-
pendicular vibration. But flat, or horizontal vibra-
tion uses a, as in clank — as of a sheet of zinc
slapping the floor; how different from the clang of
a bar of steel! Tin is a good word for that metal
in the thin shape most commonly known ; but in the
native bulk and volume we call it block.

i — Long i gives inclination. "The clouds con-
sign their treasures to the field." "In winter when


254 PLURIVERSE

the dismal rain comes down in slanting lines." I
long and a give a poetical curve, downward and
away:

"Once m the flight of ages past."
"Many an hour I've whiled away."
"SwUled by the wUd and wasteful ocean."
"Some happier island in the watery waste."
"O when shall it dawn on the night of the grave?"
"Athens, and Tyre, and Balbec, and the waste

Where stood Jerusalem."
"O, wUd enchanting horn."

o. — Plato seems to have done miserable injus-
tice in characterizing for simple roundness the vowel
o — the noblest Roman, or Greek either, of them all.
Roundness is well enough — although roundness
proper is represented by ou diphthong — but round-
ness is merely the key to volume, solemnity, nobility,
and wonder. Read this most solemn sentence in all
literature, and see at once the more serious meaning
of o:

For man goeth to his long home, and the mourners
go about the streets.

Not all the trappings and the suits of woe can
so pall the sunlight in the homes of men as does the
fit reading of this sombre verse. Burns's idea of
o was expressed in "the wailing minstrel of despair-
ing woe." Swedenborg's insight was rather one of
adoration or devotion. But these comparatively in-
cidental expressions give way before the philological
art of more modern writers. All things noble,
holy, adorable, or sombre, slow, sober, dolorous.


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 256

mournful, devotional, or old, lone, sole, glorious, or
even hold, portly, pompous, find their best expres-
sion in the o sound. Jehovah, Jove, Lord God,
exalt the soul. 0, ho, lo, are exclamations which
nations use with little variance.

"0 Rotne, my cowntry, city of the soul.

The orphans of the heart must turn to thee."
"O sad Nomore, sweet Nomore."
"Roll on, thou deep and dark-blue ocean, roll."
"Their shots along the deep slowly boom."
"The lowing herds wind slowly o'er the lea.
The plowman homeward plods his weary way."

Most people think of a boulder as a big, bulky
stone; the dictionaries use the word for a class of
stones of which one need not be greater than a pea.
The o gives the volume, and the initial b gives the
bulk and brawn — which make a favorite dictionary
so popular as the "unaBridged." Yet in pebble,
which is one third made up of h, we get no bulk at
all, owing to e and p.

u. — Burns had some notion of the effect of u;
he speaks of it as "grim, deformed, with horrors en-
tering"; but obviously this was only a careless
glance of that great genius, who probably had never
thought of the character before, and who possibly
never thought of it again. But we have had enough
of u.

Of the diphthongs, au seems to me effective in
vauZt (to leap or swing), f,awnt, toss (taus), saun-
ter, jau/nt, haughty, walk, halting, and the like. Ou
is the curve of rowndness, as in bough, bow down,
crown, around, motmd, bou/nd (tied around).


256 PLURIVERSE

"Down the shouldering billows borne," Oi strikes me
forcibly in coil. lou is a favorite curve with the
poets.

"And false the light on glory's plume."
"The wide old wood resounded to her song."
"Of love's, and night's, and ocean's solitude."

But the vowels are weak and delicate when com-
pared with the consonants, which give to language
its fibre and its nerve.

b. — As a special intensity, 5 represents the dis-
position to swell out the cheeks and utter an exag-
gerating and sometimes contemptuous explosion,
such as 600/ hah! bosh! bvlly! bravo! etc. B gives
volume in a crude and semi-humorous mode. Thus
brawny, brusque, blunt, burly, bulky, big, btdly,
brazen, besides carrying a certain direct and proper
meaning, reject all refinement in favor of a humor-
ous brag, burlesque, and exaggeration of the Brob-
dignagian, "unabridged" order. It is especially
strong in connection with u short — a regular
"buster," a "big bug," bugbear, Bluebeard, and
bugaboo — a bombastic, brazen buck and blower.

c. — This letter is only s and k as convertible,
and has little individuality; that little is a kind of
slipperiness ; ch and tch are used for absurdity as
bordering on disgust. This in itch, bitch, botch,
kutch, scotch (to haggle or wound), smutch, smirch,
screech, etc., a class of words avoided by refined
society, because their humor is offensive.

d. — Plato used d and * alike for determination
or binding at an end. We see the effect of d imme-
diately in wad, sod, clod, load, rugged, leaden, dead.


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 257

The short report of a heavily loaded pistol is well
caught in the word explode.

"Earth's cities had no sound nor tread.
And ships were drifting with the dead
To shores where all was dumb"

As initial, or beginning a word, d shows a resolved
or violent disposition, as if the teeth were set: thus
in damn, dare, do, dig, drive, dogged, etc. The
metal lead is well named ; so are iron, tin, and silver.
What little effect t has, as apart from h, is certainly
similar to that of d, as Plato averred.

f, h, t, and th. — These are the ethereal, softening
letters, whose fibre is the most fine and attenuated,
as of breath without resonance. Thus in smooth,
soothe, breathe, feathery, Lethean, muffled, smoth-
ered, far, faint, forgetful. Sabbath, suffocate, froth,
stuff, muff, whiff, etc.

"The effusive South
Warms the wide air, and o'er the vault of heaven
Breathes the big clouds, with vernal showers distent.
At first a dusky wreath they seem to rise.
Scarce staining ether."

"Lethe, the river of oblivion, rolls
Her watery labyrinth."

g, I, and r. — These are the giant consonants, ex-
pressive of unquestionable and unequivocal power.
There is no humor, chaff, or nonsense about them,
and "baby talk" excludes them. Each has a distinct
force, which yet is most effective in union with one


258 PLUBIVERSE

of the others. G is the hard letter, r is the rough
and vibratory letter, and I is the chilling and polish-
ing letter. Thus gr gives the hard roughness to
grit, grate, grind, grained, gravel, grim, grvdge,
growl, groan, grunt, etc., while gl is effective in glass,
glary, glide, etc. R by itself is strong in bur, mar,
blur, scar, rude, roar, rush, writhe, scour, crisp,
fry, fritter, fragment, broken, gnarled, burly, tot-
rent, etc., etc.

"The hoarse, rough verse should like the torrent
roar."
"The wrinkled sea beneath him crawls."

"The crisped brooks," says Milton, and a hun-
dred poets after him.

Though the ocean's inmost heart be pure.
Yet the salt fringe that daily licks the shore
Is gross with sand.

Foreknowing that s is the wet or moist letter, note
how the brackish wash, the grit of the sand in the
brine, is rendered in the word gross above. Tenny-
son, also, has a quick expression of this briny wash,
where the sail-boat is said to "cut the shrill salt,"
etc. But how dry and deep-carved is the figure fol-
lowing, of a sleeping poet:

Dropt in my path like a great cup of gold.
All rich and rough with stories of the gods.

L, by itself, makes all clear, lucid, placid, liquid;
it is the polish of glow, gleam, glide, glassy, glance,
glitter, etc. The I lends the cold, metallic qual-


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 259

ity to the solidity of lead; it gives lustre and ring to
silver, as the r roughens and darkens iron. "Hear
the sledges with their bells." For the little bells we
have "the tintinnabulation that so musically swells."
h. — K must be taken into all account of fine
sounds and lights, usually with i and a; thus in
twinkle, tinJcle, flicker, sparkle, crackle, Imk, chink,
trickle; so in fibrous attenuations: nick, splick (the
quarryman's name for a chip of stone), skin, skiff,
skip, skim, skive, sketch.

"How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle.
In the icy air of night.
While the stars that over-sprinkle
All the heavens seem to twinkle
With a krystalline delight."

This of Poe is comparatively cheap work, but the
reader must detect in it the same instinct by which
the far-seeing Tennyson makes the steeds in "Ti-
thonus"

shake the darkness from their loosened manes.


And beat the tzeilight into flakes of fire.

" e'er my steps

Forgot the barefoot feel of the clay world''
"Like scaled oarage of a keen, thin fish."

■whose diapason whirls


The clanging constellations rornid the pole."

I cannot, of course, be sure that the general
reader is with me at the insight of these fine dis-
tinctions, and I beg him to consider that I might well


260 PLURIVERSE

exchange my confidence in his mutual appreciation
for a vindictive and scientific criticism, which should
prove my positions out of the preferences (some
might call them thieveries) of the poets themselves.
Take these letters, h and I. Burns sang:

"Peggy, dear, the evenmg's clear.
Swift flies the skhnming swallow."

Both Tennyson and Alexander Smith appropri-
ate the skimming swallow. Or take the word clang-
ing, quoted ahove. It first appears in the "Odys-
sey," applied to geese. Mr. Alexander Smith (who
gave promise of poetry) grasped the situation as
his own. He sings:

Unto whose fens on midnights blue and cold

Long strings of geese come clanging from the stars.

Shelley, in "The Revolt of Islam," is so beset by
this notion of clanging that he uses it twice:

With clang of wings and scream the eagle passed.
With clang of wings and scream the eagle flew.

In spite of this repetition the Laureate clangs
three times more: in "Locksley Hall" he "leads the
clanging rookery home"; in "The Princess," "The
leader wild swan in among the stars would clang it" ;
and again, in the same, "But I, an eagle, clang an
eagle to the sphere." There may seem little apposi-
tion of clanging and mere flesh and feathers, accord-
ing to the genius of the letters as herein assumed;
but if one will consider eagle a hard word, for a


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 261

hard, metallic bird, fit to fight a golden-scaled ser-
pent in the air, then the clanging may come in with
high poetical advantage. So midnights "blue and
cold," with a glitter of crystal stars, and the yelling,
and jangling, and mingling of geese, may find voice
in clanging,

m. — This is the letter of dreamy murmur and
monotony; hum, rumble, moan are onomatopoetic.
Memory is the poet's dearest word.

w. — All nations agree in saying no. There is
hardly a language in the world in which n is not the
chief element of negation. Plato makes n the sign
of inwardness (as translated) ; intensity of with-
drawal were better. It is a nasal sound, which is
intensified by drawing up the muscles of contempt
at the sides of the nose — as when we dwell upon
mean, sneaking, n-asty.

p. — This letter shows the character I have given
it in such words as plump, lump, pulp, voluptuous,
sleep, dump, ripe, lip, purple.

q. — Queer, questionable, quaint, quizzical, quip,
quirk, quiddity, quillet, squeak, squeal, squint,
squeamish, squelch, qualm, quit, quash, etc. show
q as the organ of the whimsical and outrS — the very
opposite of o.

s. — Moist, misty, nasty, sticky, steam, slop, slip,
slush, dash, swash, drizzle, all suggest water in its
different stages ; even ice is kept wet by the a. Lus-
cious, delicious, fmtri(c)ious, suggest juicy sub-
stances.

sh, either initial or final, suggests moist confusion ;
thus, initially we have shiver, shatter, shake, shrivel,
shrink, shred; finally, we have dash, clash, lash.


262 PLURIVERSE

thrash, swash, smash, trash, rush, gush, mush, slush,
etc,

" the sun new risen


Looks through the horizontal misty air

Shorn of his beams."

"The stars obtuse emit a shivered ray."

V. — Perhaps one tenth of the words which be-
gin with V have an element of vehemence: vim, vio-
lence, victory, vanquish, velocity, vigor, vice, ven-
geance, villainy,

W and y also have general emphasis,

z. — This is a dreamy letter, of hazy, mazy, dry
confusion; a lazy, drowsy, dozing, furzy, dizzy,
vi(z)ionary atmosphere attends it, in which the gen-
ius of Thomson delighted.

A pleazing land of drowzyhead it waz.
There was a question as to a certain Turk: Did
he wear the fez.?

O. Henry answered: "No, he was clean shaved.


n


The most indulgent reader will almost necessarily
suspect that as a youth with these prepossessions I
occasionally dropped into poetry on my own ac-
count; and for purely psychological purposes —
where any literary pretension would hardly obtain
— I quote frankly a specimen of what then seemed
to me poetry of the best :

THE PIRATE

On a haggard rock in the Middle Sea
Where grl£zly ■w'aves lash dismally
And sullen horror reigns.


THE POETICAL ALPHABET 263

There the wind went by with a crazy moan.
And the gibbet creaked with an iron groan
Where the Pirate hung in chains.

And beneath, far down, the sea birds gray
Winged slow and cold through briny spray

With lonely, yelping strains.
And the phantom ship with its twilight sail
Leaned far away, on a hopeless trail

From the Pirate, hung in chains.

1/0, the lightning struck in the iron-work
When thunder storms rushed grim and dark

O'er ocean's nighted plains.
But the morning Came with a ghastly smile.
And blue with fire, on the rocky isle.

The Pirate bung in chains.


DATE DUE


PRINTED IN M.SA


B830 .B65""'" ""'™'*"^ "-'"''^
'''"'^lillHHlllwiiitiSif '" "^^ philosophy


Clin


3 1924 029 019 003
