Title: The Anæsthetic Revelation
Author/subject: Benjamin Paul Blood
Year: 1874
Source: texts/02_blood_1874_anaesthetic_revelation.txt
Report type: interpretive_retrospective
State phase: coming_to; retrospective
Corpus note: The core first-person/retrospective passage where Blood defines the revelation as an experience of coming to from anesthetic stupor.

THE ANAESTHETIC REYELATION.

By the Anaesthetic Revelation I mean a certain survived

condition, (or uncondition,) in which is the satisfaction of

jskilosophy by an appreciation of the genius of being, which

appreciation cannot be brought out of that condition into

ike normal sanity of sense — cannot be formally remembered,

bat remains informal, forgotten until we return to it.

" As here we find in trances, men
Forget the dream, that happens then,
Until they fall in trance again."

Of this condition, although it may have been attained
otherwise, I know only by the use of anaesthetic agents.
After experiments ranging over nearly fourteen years I
affirm — what any man may prove at will — that there is an
invariable and reliable condition (or uncondition) ensuing
about the instant of recall from anaesthetic stupor to sensi-
ble observation, or '' coming' to,' 1 in which the genius of


34 THE ANAESTHETIC BEYELATION.

being is revealed ; but because it cannot be remembered in
the normal condition it is lost altogether through the in-
frequency of anaesthetic treatment in any individual's case
ordinarily, and buried, amid the hum of returning common
sense, under that epitaph of all illumination : " this is a
queer world." Yet I have warned others to expect this
wonder on entering the anaesthetic slumber, and none so
cautioned has failed to report of it in terms which assured
me of its realization. I have spoken with various persons
also who induce anesthesis professionally (dentists, sur-
geons, etc.,) who had observed that many patients at the
moment of recall seem as having made a startling yet
somehow matter-of-course (and even grotesque) discovery in
their own nature, and try to speak of it, but invariably fail
in a lost mood of introspection. Of what astonishes them
it is hard to give or receive intimation ; but I think most
persons who shall have tested it will accept this as the
central point of the illumination : That sanity is not the
basic quality of intelligence, but is a mere condition which
is variable, and like the humming of a wheel, goes up or
down the musical gamut according to a physical activity ;
and that only in sanity is formal or contrasting thought,
while the naked life is realized only outside of sanity alto-
gether; and it is the instant contrast of this "tasteless
water of souls" with formal thought as we " come to/' that
leaves in the patient an astonishment that the awful mys-
tery of Life is at last but a homely and a common thing,.,
and that aside from mere formality the majestic and the
absurd are of equal dignity. The astonishment is aggra-
vated as at a thing of course, missed by sanity in overstep-
ping, as in too foreign a search, or with too eager an atten-
tion : as in finding one's spectacles on one's nose, or in
making in the dark a step higher than the stair. My
first experiences of this revelation had many varieties' of
emotion ; but as a man grows calm and determined by
experience in general, so am I now not only firm and fa-
miliar in this once weird condition, but triumphant — di-


THE ANAESTHETIC REVELATION.


vine. To minds of sanguine imagination there will be a
sadness in the tenor of the mystery, as if the key-note of
the universe were low, — for no poetry, no emotion known
to the normal sanity of man can furnish a hint of its pri-
meval prestige, and its ail-but appalling solemnity ; but for
such as have felt sadly the instability of temj:>oral things
there is a comfort of serenity and ancient peace ; while for
the resolved and imperious spirit there are majesty and su-
premacy unspeakable. Nor can it be long until all who
enter the anaesthetic condition (and there are hundreds
every secular day) will be taught to expect this revelation,
and will date from its experience their initiation into the
Secret of Life.

Men and brethren, into this pervading genius we pass,
forgetting and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God.
There is no higher, no deeper, no other, than the life in
which we are founded.

" The One remains, the many change and pass ;"

and each and every of us is the One that remains. — Listen,
then, to the charming of the Prince of Peace, who takes
away the sin of the world, and say, each for himself, u My
Father and I are one.'' — Mourn not for the dead, who have
awoke in the bosom of God. They care not, they think
not, and when we are what they are, we too shall think of
them no more. — Much might I say of the good of this dis-
covery, if it were, as it soon may be, generally known of.
Now for the first time the ancient problem is referred to
empirical resolution, when the expert and the novice may
meet equally on the same ground. My worldly tribulation
reclines on its divine composure; and though not in haste
to die, I "care not to be dead," but look into the future
with serene and changeless cheer. This world is no more
that alien terror which was taught me. Spurning the cloud-
grimed and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan
thunders boomed, my gray gull lifts her wing against the
.nightfall, and takes the dim leagues with a fearless eve.


36 THE AH^SSTHETIC REVELATION.

By this revelation we enter to the sadness and the majesty
of Jesus — to the solemn niysterywlijch inspired the proph-
ets of every generation. By some accident of being they
entered to this condition. This is "the voice of One cry-
ing in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lore?.*
He that hath ears to hear let him hear. Heed not for them-
selves the voice nor the hand, which ever deny themselves;
remember only how many inspired times it is spoke®
and written : I AM— that God whom faltering spirits seek
in far-off courts of heaven, while behold ! the kingdom of
God is neither "lo ! here" nor u lo ! there" but within yon ; it
is the Soul. Thou shalt vanish, but the Soul is eternal : I
speak not of souls. And behold, I say unto you, the Su-
preme Genius doth not facultize ; the glory is not what It
does but what it is; it hath no old nor new, no here nor
there ; it stays not to remember, to wonder, to compare ; to*
the vehm of the patrician Presence, omniscience were ss:a
idle labor and delay, and prophecy is forestalled and boot-
less in the sole sufficiency whose paean hath no echo.

This is the Ultimatum. It is no glance between condi-
tions, as ii in passing from this sphere of existence we might
catch a glimpse of

" The Gods, who haunt
The lucid interspace of world and world,
Where never creeps a cloud, or moves a wind,
Nor ever falls the least white star of snow,"

and lose them again as we pass on to another orb and or-
ganization. This thick net of space containing all worlds
— this fate of being which contains both gods and men 7 is
the capacity of the Soul, and can be claimed as greater
than us only by claiming a greater than the greatest, as/cl
denying God and safety. As sure as being — whence is $11
our care — so sure is content, beyond duplexity, antithesis, rar
trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that Ge<$
is not above.

It is written that " there was war in heaven,"— that seobs
of dominion, as absolute as any, beheld the banners of L.n-


THE ANAESTHETIC KEVJELATION. 37

cifer streaking with silver and crimson the mists of the
morning, and beard the heavy guns of Moloch and Belial
beating on the heights of the mind ; and I read that dead
men have appeared as human forms;— nought of this can I
deny, more or better than I can deny myself. The tales,
whether they be true or false, are as substantial as the
things of which they tell.

u
