Title: Consciousness Under Nitrous Oxide
Author/subject: Anonymous English correspondent, introduced by William James
Year: 1898
Source: Psychological Review 5(2):194-196; transcription cross-checked from public search snippet/Scribd preview
Report type: quoted_first_person
State phase: induction; peak; coming_to; retrospective
Corpus note: A near-ideal Victorian trip report: induction, blackout, intellectual ecstasy, moral ecstasy, visionary figure, comic return, and loss of insight.

CONSCIOUSNESS UNDER NITROUS OXIDE.

An English correspondent sends me the following account of his subjective experiences during nitrous-oxide intoxication. I place it (with his permission) on record in the PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW. Normal human consciousness is only a narrow extract from a great sea of possible human consciousness, of whose limits we know nothing, but of the nature of portions of which such documents as the following may help to inform us. It were greatly to be wished that they might be multiplied. W. J.

The note in your book, entitled 'The Will to Believe,' upon the above subject, recalls to my mind a strange experience which I had in June, 1895, while still an undergraduate at Oxford.

I had been studying philosophy, and had about as much acquaintance with it as a man gets in two years, who has a good deal of natural interest in abstract speculation, but very little natural talent for it. The ideas of Hegel, though exercising a tolerable fascination over my mind, were only known to me at second or third hand, through English and Scotch writers and casual conversation.

One morning in June, 1895, or certainly not later than the end of May, I went round to a dentist's opposite Balliol College, to have a tooth out. I had never 'taken gas' before, and never have since. My experience was, as accurately as I can remember it at this distance of time, as follows:

Either of set purpose, or to distract my mind from the intensely uncomfortable process of 'going off,' I determined to observe very carefully the changes in my conscious states.

What happened, I found, was that the contents of consciousness, the feelings, gradually became reduced, till I came down nearly, though not quite, to the bare uncolored fact of consciousness of existence almost divorced from sensation. By this time, of course, I was hardly in a position to observe accurately, but when I came afterwards to think the matter over, it seemed that I had spent an absurdly long time in this state, and then suddenly, when I was hoping for it, but least expecting it, had 'gone out,' like a snuffed candle.

The next experience I became aware of, who shall relate! my God! I knew everything! A vast inrush of obvious and absolutely satisfying solutions to all possible problems overwhelmed my entire being, and an all-embracing unification of hitherto contending and apparently diverse aspects of truth took possession of my soul by force. The odd thing, and one that sent a ripple of merriment through my consciousness, was that I seemed to have reconciled Hegelianism itself with all other schools of philosophy in some higher synthesis. The biter bit!

Then, in a flash, this state of intellectual ecstasy was succeeded by one that I shall never forget, because it was still more novel to me than the other--I mean a state of moral ecstasy. I was seized with an immense yearning to take back this truth to the feeble, sorrowing, struggling world in which I had lived. I pictured to myself with justifiable pride how they could not fail to recognize it as being the real truth when they heard it, and I saw that previous prophets had been rejected only because the truths they brought were partial and on that account not convincing. I had a balm for all hurts, and the prospect of how entire humanity would crowd around to bless the bringer nearly intoxicated me. But I thought I was dying and should not be able to tell them. I had never cared much for life, but it was then that I prayed and strove to live for the world's sake, as I had never prayed and striven before.

It seemed in vain, however, that I battled for life, and I was just resigning myself to extinction when an immense sense of relief and of some obstacle having given way broke in upon me. This was, of course, succeeded by another fit of philanthropic ecstasy. Five or ten seconds more, and I should be able to speak, and the world would really be redeemed, whether I lived on or not. It was a moment of the supremest bliss, exceeding those former ones. Suddenly I saw standing on a little pink stage a little pink man with a kindly face which I seemed to recognize. Who could it be? Then, as the little pink man grew rapidly larger and less pink, and I steamed into the position of normal consciousness (for that was the sensation) I heard a voice, apparently not that of the little pink man, but coming from some one out of my range of vision, say: "That would have been a tough job without the elevator." These words gave me power to speak out, and I shouted aloud: "That would have been a tough job without the elevator; I've found out some metaphysics!" Hardly had I said the words, however, than they mocked me. The truth had evaporated, like a forgotten dream, and left me with half-formed phrases on my lips and an ashen-gray delight in my heart. The dentist asked me whether I wasn't suffering from a sluggish liver, and the little pink man, the doctor, recommended me to go away for a change of air. Shades of the prison-house have since closed about me, and Professor Caird still reigns unchallenged at Balliol.
