Title: Letter on the anaesthetic revelation
Author/subject: Xenos Clark, quoted by William James
Year: 1902
Source: texts/06_james_1902_varieties_religious_experience.txt
Report type: quoted_first_person
State phase: coming_to; retrospective
Corpus note: A compact report of the anaesthetic revelation as non-emotional insight into time, process, inevitability, and the 'now'.

Xenos Clark, a philosopher, who
 died young at Amherst in the ’80’s, much lamented by those who knew
 him, was also impressed by the revelation. “In the first place,” he
 once wrote to me, “Mr. Blood and I agree that the revelation is, if
 anything, non‐emotional. It is utterly flat. It is, as Mr. Blood
 says, ‘the one sole and sufficient insight why, or not why, but how,
 the present is pushed on by the past, and sucked forward by the
 vacuity of the future. Its inevitableness defeats all attempts at
 stopping or accounting for it. It is all precedence and
 presupposition, and questioning is in regard to it forever too late.
 It is an _initiation of the past_.’ The real secret would be the
 formula by which the ‘now’ keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet
 never escapes. What is it, indeed, that keeps existence exfoliating?
 The formal being of anything, the logical definition of it, is
 static. For mere logic every question contains its own answer—we
 simply fill the hole with the dirt we dug out. Why are twice two
 four? Because, in fact, four is twice two. Thus logic finds in life
 no propulsion, only a momentum. It goes because it is a‐going. But
 the revelation adds: it goes because it is and _was_ a‐going. You
 walk, as it were, round yourself in the revelation. Ordinary
 philosophy is like a hound hunting his own trail. The more he hunts
 the farther he has to go, and his nose never catches up with his
 heels, because it is forever ahead of them. So the present is
 already a foregone conclusion, and I am ever too late to understand
 it. But at the moment of recovery from anæsthesis, just then,
 _before starting on life_, I catch, so to speak, a glimpse of my
 heels, a glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of starting.
 The truth is that we travel on a journey that was accomplished
 before we set out; and the real end of philosophy is accomplished,
 not when we arrive at, but when we remain in, our destination (being
 already there),—which may occur vicariously in this life when we
 cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there is a smile
 upon the face of the revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we
 are forever half a second too late—that’s all. ‘You could kiss your
 own lips, and have all the fun to yourself,’ it says, if you only
 knew the trick. It would be perfectly easy if they would just stay
 there till you got round to them. Why don’t you manage it somehow?”
