Title: Chloroform self-experiment at Simpson's house
Author/subject: James Young Simpson and associates
Year: 1847
Source: texts/10_wellcome_1910_anaesthetics_antient_modern.txt
Report type: quoted_first_person
State phase: induction; peak; coming_to
Corpus note: Simpson's letter and Miller's report preserve the first-person discovery scene: simultaneous inhalation, collapse, and the thought that chloroform was stronger than ether.

resolved to try it by experimenting on himself and his assistants. He
made the first experiment in his own house on November 4th, 1847, and
in a letter written to Waldie thus describes the event: “I am sure
you will be delighted to see part of the good results of our hasty
conversation. I had the chloroform for several days in the house before
trying it, as, after seeing it such a heavy, unvolatile-like liquid,
I despaired of it, and went on dreaming about others. The first night
we took it, Dr. Duncan, Dr. Keith and I all tried it simultaneously,
and were all ‘under the table’ in a minute or two.” Professor Miller,
who was a neighbour of Simpson’s, used to come every morning to see
if the experimenters had survived! He describes how, “after a weary
day’s labour, Simpson and his assistants sat down and inhaled various
drugs out of tumblers, as was their custom. Chloroform was searched
for and found beneath a heap of waste paper, and with each tumbler
newly charged the inhalers resumed their occupation. . . . A moment
more, then all was quiet; then a crash. On awakening, Simpson’s first
perception was mental. ‘This is far stronger and better than ether,’
said he to himself. His second was to note that he was prostrate on the
floor, and that among the friends about him there was both confusion
and alarm. Of his assistants, Dr. Duncan he saw snoring heavily, and
Dr. Keith kicking violently at the table above him. They made several
more trials of it on that eventful evening, and were so satisfied with
the results that the festivities did not terminate until a late hour.”
