Garcia de Orta, Eighth Colloquy: Bangue

Source: Colloquies on the Simples and Drugs of India, translated by Clements Markham (London: Henry Sotheran, 1913), pp. 53-56. Original Portuguese edition published in Goa in 1563.

BANGUE


Ruano

HAT  is  the  difference  between  that
which  they  call  Bangue  l  and  Amfiam  ?
It  seems  to  me  that  they  are  one,  for
when  you  abuse  your  servants  you
sometimes  call  them  Bangue  and  some-
times Amfiam.  I,  therefore,  wish  to
know  whether  there  is  any  difference
between  the  two  words.

Orta

The  Amfiam  we  call  opium,  of  which  I  will  speak  to  you
when  we  come  to  it.  I  will  now  satisfy  you  respecting  the
nature  of  Bangue,  its  tree  and  seed.  Antonia  !  give  me  what
I  told  you  to  bring.

1  Bangue,  that  is  bhanga  [Sanskrit  for  "  broken "],  called  by  the  Arabs  haschish
[whence  the  English  word  "assassins"],  the  gathered  and  dried  leaves  of  Cannabis
indica,  var.  sativa,  the  kinah  of  the  Arabs.  The  whole  dried  plant  is  called  ganja
[  =  "the  plant"].  Bhanga  is  the  larger  leaves  only,  the  preparations  from  them  being
called  sidhi,  and  sabza  ;  the  preparations  of  the  smaller  leaves  are  called  savia,  and
.siikhu  ;  all  are  highly  aphrodisiac.  Charas  is  the  gum  resin  exuded  by  the  plant,  and  is
smoked.  Majum  is  a  confection  of  charas,  bhanga,  and  ganja,  with  opium,  and  spices
added  ;  and  tadhal  a  milder  majum.  The  haschish  in  it  gives  its  evil  fame  to  opium  smok-
ing.    Haschish  means  grass ;  and,  so,  Aba-haschish ,  "  Father  of  all  Grasses,"  "a  botanist."

53


EIGHTH  COLLOQUY


Antonia


Here  is  the  tree  of  the  small  ones,  and  see  here  is  the  seed,
and  here  is  what  they  sell  in  the  drug  shop.  For  you  told  me
to  bring  them  altogether.

Ruano

This  seed  is  like  that  of  flax  (Alcana ve),1  except  that  it  is
smaller  and  not  so  white,  and  the  little  tree  is  also  like  flax,  so
we  need  not  discuss  them  because  we  already  know  all  about  it.

Orta

It  is  not  flax  (Alcana ve),  for  the  seed  is  smaller  and  not
white,  and  the  Indians  eat  either  the  seeds  or  the  pounded
leaves  to  assist  or  quiet  the  women.  They  also  take  it  for
another  purpose,  to  give  an  appetite ;  and  our  writers  say  that
the  branches  have  much  inside  and  little  rind,  which  is  contrary
to  what  the  flax  (Alcanave)  has.

Ruano
Do  they  make  cords  of  this  bark  ?

Out  a

No.

Ruano

Is  there  anything  else  from  which  they  do  make  cords  ?

Orta

Yes.  From  the  fruit  of  the  palm,  which  I  shall  touch
upon  further  on.  Also  in  Balaguate  they  make  cords  from
the  roots  of  a  very  large  tree,  and,  to  confess  the  truth,  they
also  make  them  from  the  flax  (Alcanave)  which  is  plentiful
there,  but  not  in  the  Deccan  or  Bengal.  I  saw  there  our  flax
from  which  we  make  our  shirts,  and  all  this  flax  is  merchandize

1  The  old  Portuguese  name  for  flax,  now  called  Canhamo.     The  Arabic  form  is
kinab,  the  Persian  kunab,  imd  the  Greek  Kdwa^is.

54


BANGUE

to  be  met  with  in  the  above  countries.  They  call  it  Alci.1
But  there  is  very  little  of  the  flax  (Alcana ve)  on  the  mainland.
What  is  here  is  not  the  flax  (Alcana ve).

Ruaxo

Be  it  so  ;  and  now  tell  me  how  this  Bangue  is  made,  and
how  and  for  what  it  is  taken.

Orta

They  make  the  pressed  leaves,  sometimes  witli  the  seeds,
into  a  powder.  Some  inject  Akeca  vekde,  and  those  who
drink  it  become  beside  themselves.  For  the  same  purpose
they  mix  nutmeg  and  mace  with  it,  and  there  is  the  same
effect  in  drinking  it.  Others  inject  cloves,  others  camphor  of
Borneo,  others  amber  and  Almisque,  others  opium.  These
are  the  Moors,  who  are  much  addicted  to  it.  The  profit  from
its  use  is  for  the  man  to  be  beside  himself,  and  to  be  raised
above  all  cares  and  anxieties,  and  it  makes  some  break  into  a
foolish  laugh.  I  hear  that  many  women  take  it  when  they
want  to  dally  and  flirt  with  men.  It  is  also  said,  but  it  may
not  be  true,  that  the  great  captains,  in  ancient  times,  used  to
drink  it  with  wine  or  with  opium,  that  they  might  rest  from
their  work,  be  without  care,  and  be  able  to  sleep  ;  for  the  long
vigils  of  such  became  a  torment  to  them.  The  great  Sultan
Bahadur 2  said  to  Martin  Affbnso  de  Souza,  to  whom  he
wished  every  good  thing  and  to  whom  he  told  his  secrets,  that
when,  at  night,  he  wanted  to  go  to  Portugal,  Brazil,  Turkey,
Arabia,  or  Persia,  he  only  had  to  take  a  little  Bangue.3     This

1  Alci  here,  in  the  Sanskrit  atasi,  commonly  called  alsi}  the  flax  plant,  Linum
usitatissimum,  widely  grown  in  India  for  its  oil  seed.

-  In  1536,  after  the  Portuguese  had  got  possession  of  the  fort  of  Diu,  Bahadur  Shah
was  in  the  town.  One  night  he  came  and  battered  at  the  gate  of  the  fort.  When
it  was  opened  lie  came  in  shouting  and  nearly  dying  of  laughter,  reeling  about  until
he  fell  down  and  went  to  sleep.  He  had  been  taking  bhang. — Lendas  de  India,
Gaspar  Cokrea,  iii.  754.

3  This  passage  is  quoted  by  Yule  in  his  Glossary.

55


EIGHTH  COLLOQUY

was  made  up  into  an  electuary  with  sugar  and  spices,  and  was
called  Maju.

Ruano

Has  it  this  pleasant  effect  on  everybody  ?

Okta

It  may  be  that  it  has  this  effect  when  we  have  become
accustomed  to  it.  I  myself  saw  a  Portuguese  jester,  who  was
for  a  long  time  with  me  in  Balaguate,  eat  a  slice  or  two  of  the
electuary,  and  at  night  he  was  pleasantly  intoxicated,  his
utterance  not  intelligible.  Then  he  became  sad,  began  to
shed  tears,  and  was  plunged  in  grief.  In  his  case  the  effect
was  sadness  and  nausea.  Those  who  saw  or  heard  of  it  were
provoked  to  laughter  as  if  it  was  an  ordinary  drinking  bout.
Those  of  my  servants  who  took  it,  unknown  to  me,  said  that
it  made  them  so  as  not  to  feel  work,  to  be  very  happy,  and  to
have  a  craving  for  food.  I  believe  that  it  is  so  generally  used
and  by  such  a  number  of  people  that  there  is  no  mystery  about
it.  But  I  have  not  tried  it,  nor  do  I  wish  to  do  so.  Many
Portuguese  have  told  me  that  they  have  taken  it,  and  that
they  experienced  the  same  symptoms,  more  especially  the
female  partakers.  However,  this  is  not  one  of  our  medicines
and  we  had  better  not  waste  any  more  time  over  it.1

1  Chapter  lxi.  of  Acosta  is  on  bhanga,  taken  from  Orta  ;  two  pages.
